House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 128, 1982 Wednesday, 8 September 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Questions without Notice Wednesday, 8 September 1982

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1153 QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
POLAND: DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS
Notice of Motion
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I will move:
That members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament-
(I) convey to the Governments of Poland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics-
(a) the members' serious concern at the continued detention of trade union leader Lech Walesa, and
(b) the belief that this detention(i) constitutes a denial of basic human rights, and (ii) contravenes the right of workers to organise themselves into trade unions and associations to speak and act on their behalf, and
(2) call for the immediate release of Mr Walesa and the restoration of the Polish people's democratic rights and freedoms asset out in the United Nations Charter.
INCOME TAX LAWS
Notice of Motion
Mr GROOM (Braddon)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) calls for all laws to be simple to understand and administer;
(2) expresses its concern-
(a) that while the 1936 Income Tax Assessment Act comprised only 85 pages and the 1973 reprint of the Act 555 pages, the present Act consists of 1,092 pages, and
(b) that since 1975 there have been 69 amendments to the Act comprising 1,047 substantive pages of new tax law,and
(3) further calls for the establishment of a task force of practical people to overhaul completely the income tax laws with a view to making them equitable, effective and simple.
POLAND: DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS
Notice of Motion
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
( I) notes with concern recent reports of suppression by Polish Martial Law Authorities of peaceful demonstrations in Poland which sought the restoration of political rights and the release of political prisoners, and
(2) calls upon the Polish Martial Law Authorities to-
(a) end martial law in Poland; (b) free Lech Walesa and other detainees associated with
the Solidarity Free Trade Union, and, (c) recognise the right of free and democratic unions to
operate under the terms of the Gdansk agreement.

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Armitage proceeding to address a question to the Prime Minister--
Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I ask why the question is out of order.
Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order because I will not allow questions to be asked on matters for which the person to whom the question is addressed is not responsible to this House. I think it is very important that that principle be observed, otherwise issues between the parliamentary party and the organisational party will be a matter for ventilation in this House when there is no responsibility for them on the part of a Minister in the House.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, in that case, I take a further point of order. I am sure that there was some murmuring and perhaps you did not hear the question clearly. The thrust of the honourable member's question very simply was to refer to statements that the Prime Minister made in this House yesterday when he quoted from a document. The honourable member has proceeded no further than to indicate that the Prime Minister quoted from a document to which he resorted. In those circumstances it would be rather odd if the question could not proceed.
Mr SPEAKER-It would not be odd. The fact is--
Mr Hayden-A normal, reasonable--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is a very reasonable person. Therefore, he will listen to me while I make the explanation. The fact is that the Standing Orders put certain boundaries upon questions. They do not put the same boundaries upon what an honourable member is entitled to say in the course of a debate so it does not make a question in order to quote from what an honourable member said in a debate. The question is out of order.
Mr Armitage-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. This question is most important. It tests the veracity of statements by the Prime Minister in the Parliament yesterday. It is obvious from the Press this morning that he was not telling the truth.
Mr SPEAKER-The importance of the question is not the issue.

1154 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Questions without Notice

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS
Mr TUCKEY-I address my question to the Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce. I refer him to correspondence that he and his Department have received from me over the past 18 months relating to the Phillips tractor company of Merredin in agricultural Western Australia. It is a small but viable manufacturer of four wheel drive agricultural tractors ranging in value from $70,000 to $250,000. Is it a fact that this company must pay the 2 per cent special revenue duty on all its imported mechanical components, thus increasing costs by $600 to $900 per tractor? Is it a fact that all imported four wheel drive tractors are free of all duty, including the revenue duty, and therefore have a substantial competitive advantage over the Australian product? Further, can arrangements similar to those announced for the shipping industry be made for this viable and efficient manufacturer, thus alleviating this obvious injustice?
Mr HODGMAN-Whilst the honourable member was kind enough to tell me that he would ask this question, it is not a Dorothy Dixer because he is critical of an aspect of Government policy which I feel ought to be debated by the House and certainly taken into account. The 2 per cent revenue duty which was imposed by the Government on 24 May 1979 does apply. That is the response to the first part of the honourable member's question. In respect of the second part of his question the answer is also yes. It is fair to say that the question of this duty was considered this year by the Government in the Budget context, but because of monetary constraints it was not possible to remove the duty. Lastly, I say to the honourable member in relation to the specifics of the case that, if the company concerned is able to raise the Australian content of its product to 55 per cent, which is the minimum required, the company will be eligible for the current bounty assistance. Unfortunately, at present the company's Australian content is only 43 per cent. Unless it can bridge the gap between 43 per cent and 55 per cent the benefit will not be available.
TAX MINIMISATION
Mr WALLIS-Is the Prime Minister aware of a tax minimisation scheme which is both very sophisticated and very lucrative for the South Australian branch of the Liberal Party? Has the Prime Minister been consulted by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs about the role played by the Minister in setting up this scheme? Has the Minister told the Prime Minister whether the scheme can be classed as tax evasion or only tax avoidance? Has the Minister, as Minister Assisting the

Treasurer, advised the Prime Minister what the cost of this scheme will be to the taxpayers?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have had no advice of any kind related to the information that was in the honourable member's question. One can only assume that the honourable member, in asking a question of that kind, is continuing the totally false smear tactics of the Leader of the Opposition.
NORTHERN TERRITORY POSTCODES
Mr TAMBLING-I ask the Minister for Communications: What stage has Australia Post reached in its review of postcodes which I was advised was under way some six months ago? Can the Minister advise whether Australia Post has reached a decision on the allocation of a more distinctive range of postcodes for the Northern Territory? When will the Northern Territory be divorced from the 5000 range which is applicable in South Australia? What particular recognition will be given to all Darwin suburbs?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I am not personally aware of all the precise postcodes in the Northern Territory, but I am doing my best to memorise them lest I be made the subject of an attack by the Opposition. The specific matter raised by the honourable member has been under investigation and review by the Australian Postal Commission, and that review is considerably advanced. I have received several reports from the Postal Commission. Amongst other things, the Commission is taking into account, as I am, the very strong representations made by the honourable member. I know that the honourable member feels that, with the emergence of the Northern Territory as a very significant geographical and political entity in its own right, the people of the Northern Territory, particularly Darwin, should have distinctive postcodes. I share that view and I am very grateful that the honourable member should have pursued the matter with so much zeal and resolution. I can assure him that the case that he has advanced will certainly be examined.
ALLEGATIONS AGAINST MINISTER
Dr EVERINGHAM-I refer the Minister for Administrative Services to his obscure statement of 31 August last in which he announced the exoneration of an unidentified Minister from unspecified allegations. Were these allegations serious enough to warrant investigation by Federal and Victorian police and other government instrumentalities? Did the Minister order this investigation on his own initiative or after consultation with or at the behest of another Minister? Did the Minister decide on his own initiative that

Questions without Notice

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1155

the identity of the Minister involved and the nature of the allegations should be suppressed, or was that done after consultation with or at the behest of another Minister? Will the Minister make full disclosure on this matter to the House to
avoid further speculation within his and other departments that the Government is trying to cover up yet another scandal involving a senior
Minister?

ORGANISED CRIME
Mr GOODLUCK-Has the Minister for Administrative Services seen reports that three knights are involved in organised crime? Further, has he seen reports that they are well known to the police? Can the Minister inform the House whether these allegations are known to the Australian Federal Police? I suggest that the Minister give somebody a serve about Tilt, too.

Mr NEWMAN-I am prepared to describe the Mr NEWMAN-I am aware of the allegations

circumstances which led to that statement. They that have been made in this regard. The alle-

are as follows: I was advised that during an intergations, of course, have been made by the Leader

view with the Victorian police by Mr Patrick of the Opposition. We should take note of the fact

McCabe allegations were mentioned to him that a that ever since the Costigan report was given to

Commonwealth Minister had purchased a unit on the Government, and given to the Leader of the

the Gold Coast, that that purchase was from, to Opposition as a courtesy so that he should be

use the words, 'Australia's biggest drug runner' informed on this very important and serious situ-

and that part of the purchase price for that unit ation, the Leader of the Opposition has set out to

had been a car which the Minister had allegedly smear individuals and to smear the Liberal Party

imported duty free. These allegations were passed of Australia. Right from the very first moment

on to Mr McCabe, I understand, as part of an unwhen he stood on the steps of Parliament House

substantiated rumour which emanated from a . the night after that he said that he had read the re-

known criminal. They were serious accusations port and that it blew his brains out. On radio

and, of course, they cast a very serious slur on the stations, in newspapers and on television he has

person who was named in them.

gone out of his way to say that people in the Lib-

I took that matter to the Minister concerned. He immediately said that the matter should be investigated and offered every co-operation in that investigation. I put in train with the Australian Federal Police an extensive investigation. I have been subsequently advised by the Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police that that extensive investigation has shown that the allegations have absolutely no substance

eral Party are involved in organised crime. Sometimes he says it directly and sometimes he says it by implication and innuendo, as he did yesterday. One of the things he said yesterday was that three knights were involved in organised crime. He said a lot more about it as well. First of all he implied in this House that the names were contained in the Costigan report.
Mr Hayden-No.

whatsoever. Indeed, the only aspect of the alleMr NEWMAN-Yes, he did. Of course, one

gations that is true is the fact that the Minister did has only to consult leading newspaper headlines

buy a unit on the Gold Coast. They are the facts right around this country. All of us understood

of the matter.

exactly what the Leader of the Opposition was

I ask all honourable members just to reflect once again on the circumstances. If any small time criminal or any other person who has a motive makes an allegation against a member of this House and if that allegation is repeated in the gossip columns that are around us in this House and if other members of the Press Gallery seize upon it and promote it to a red hot rumour that has the whole place buzzing, it puts every member of this

either saying or trying to imply. The Leader of the Opposition, after he left this place, quickly woke up to the fact that he would be caught out. What he was saying in the House about the Costigan report was a total lie; it was untruthful. What happened when he went to his Press conference? He had to start recovering.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order.

House in jeopardy. If the allegation is to be Mr Porter-Aren't you embarrassable?

promoted to the front pages of the newspapers as soon as it is made, where does it lead all of us? I think Mr Laurie Oakes summed up the situation pretty well in an article he wrote in the Age on 3 September. He said:

Mr Hayden-Not by members of the Liberal Party because they do not have the decency to cause embarrassment.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the Leader of the Opposition wish to raise a point of order?

A lie told by a big-talking criminal had somehow escalated into front-page news. The episode demonstrated how easily

Mr Hayden-The Minister said that some

and unfairly a politician's reputation can be damaged.

things he alleged I had said were a total lie. I draw

1156 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Questions without Notice

your attention to the unparliamentary nature of what he said, Mr Speaker, although it is characteristic of what one would expect from honourable members opposite now that they are beleaguered by their own faults.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. The Minister for Administrative Services will withdraw.
Mr NEWMAN-I withdraw.
Mr Vren-Mr Speaker, could I ask why you did not ask the Minister to withdraw without a point of order being taken?
Mr SPEAKER-That is a good question. I must say to the House that I was slow in requiring it to be withdrawn.
Mr Vren-You were slow? You were dead slow.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat.
Mr Cadman-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Those terms were used yesterday by the honourable member for Parramatta. Could we have some consistency in this matter from yourself, from deputy speakers, and from chairmen of committees?
Mr SPEAKER-The point of order raised by the honourable member for Mitchell is worth dealing with for the information of honourable members. When there is a substantive motion of censure, as there was yesterday, the rules do not require members not to use words of that kind. It is not good parliamentary practice; nevertheless, the Chair cannot intervene. This is not a censure motion. There is no substantive motion. Therefore the Minister is not entitled to use those terms and they should be withdrawn. The Minister has done that.
Mr NEWMAN-I had got to the point where the Leader of the Opposition then had to go to a Press conference and substantiate what he had said in this House. At that stage he knew that he could not substantiate what he had been saying about Costigan. The next thing he did was to take refuge in the fact that, he said, police officers had briefed him that the three knights were well known to the police, and were involved in organised crime. We are used to this pattern of behaviour. The Leader of the Opposition tried it on with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and wasfound--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr NEWMAN-Have some fun. The Leader of the Opposition tried it on with the Deputy Prime Minister in March and April this year and

he was found out utterly and completely. He twisted facts; he made a statement saying that affidavits existed. Of course, nothing at all could be proven.
Mr Hayden-I said what? That affidavits existed?
Mr NEWMAN-The Leader of the Opposition will recall quite well. Mr Speaker, when--
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I am afraid the Minister is chewing mescalin again. I made no reference yesterday to affidavits, either in or out of the House. But I suppose when one has a hard case one has to manufacture one's story.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! There is no point of order.
Mr NEWMAN-The Leader of the Opposition well knows that I am referring to affidavits that did not exist when he tried to prove a case against the Deputy Prime Minister. What are the facts? It greatly concerned me and the Government that policemen-I think the Leader of the Opposition claimed that they were senior policemen, but he has said so many things about this that it is difficult to trace all he has saidshould be briefing the Leader of the Opposition in such a serious fashion. Mark what he is saying: Three knights in this country are involved in organised crime and he has been briefed by police. I have had some investigations done. A document from the Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police states:
During a debate in the House of Representatives on 7 September 1982 the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Hayden, referred to information conveyed to him by the police concerning the identity of three eminent gentlemen said to have been elevated to the peerage. The Australian Federal Police has not conveyed any information to the Leader of the Opposition concerning three eminent gentlemen said to have been elevated to the peerage or any other information concerning matters currently before the Parliament following the report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union.
Another report has been handed to me by the Commissioner, who states:
I have already advised you that the Australian Federal Police have not made any information available to the Leader of the Opposition about any three eminent gentlemen nor have they made any information available to the Leader of the Opposition in respect of any of the matters covered in the Costigan Royal Commission reports. I arranged for an Assistant Commissioner to inquire of each of the Australian commissioners of police to ascertain whether or not their forces had made any such information available to Mr Hayden. The Assistant Commissioner spoke to each of the commissioners directly, with the exception of Commissioner Robinson, who is overseas.
That is the Tasmanian Commissioner-

Questions without Notice

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1157

The Assistant Commissioner directed his questions to Assistant Commissioner Swinton of the Tasmanian Police, who is standing in for Mr Robinson. The Assistant Commissioner informs me that each of the commissioners had informed him that no information of the nature referred to had been passed to the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. So that the record is correct, I am looking for the actual quote in the Hansard record. We can come to that matter later. First, the Minister is playing on a literal interpretation--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. He is making a point of debate, not a point of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, on the point of order, the Minister is making a complete misrepresentation of fact. It is a fabrication. I can obtain the date and time when officers of the Commonwealth and State police forces gave me this information at their headquarters here in Canberra, whether you call it a briefing or information conveyed privately.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I call the Minister.
Mr NEWMAN-It is much worse than this because at that Press conference, when quizzed by the Press-and quite rightly so-he went on to say:
I did not say that.
That is, he was refuting that he had said it was in Costigan-
I said it is well known that there are three knights of the realm prominent in the corporate sector who are involved in organised crime in this country. It is well known to most of you because I have discussed those names with you before.
I give an invitation to the Leader of the Opposition right now. We have proved that he has had no briefings from any senior policemen. I invite him now to go to my office where there is a policeman and if he wants to tell him the allegations again and give the evidence that would lead him to those statements made yesterday he is there for him to do it now.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, so that there will be no misunderstanding, at an appropriate time. I trust immediately at the end of Question Time-I will put the record straight on this matter.
TAX EVASION
Mr ARMITAGE-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I refer to the Prime Minister's statement during the debate on yesterday's censure motion in which he claimed that he had obtained unanimous support for the Government's proposed retrospective legislation against bottom-of-the-harbour tax evasion and indeed quoted documents to support this claim. Has the

Prime Minister seen a statement that one of those who he claimed supported the Government's legislation has since dissociated himself from the Government's proposed action? In the light of this contradiction is the Prime Minister prepared to restate his claim or to revise it?
An Opposition member-Or tell the truth.
Mr SPEAKER-I did not notice who made that interjection but it was unparliamentary.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I made it perfectly plain that all State presidents of the Liberal Party supported the statement put out in the name of the Federal Executive, and that remains so. As a result of some misinterpretation of that statement in the media the Federal President put out a further letter which was obviously his own statement. In my view that letter is identical in its content and sense to the statement. I understand from what I read in one newspaper this morning that a certain State president may have dissociated himself from that letter. If he has I can only suggest that he wait and contain himself until the colour of the legislation is seen.
EXPORTS: AUSTRALIA'S INTERNATIONAL REPUTATION
Mr SPENDER-Has the attention of the Deputy Prime Minister been drawn to an article in the Australian Financial Review of 7 September concerning a resources development and supply conference in Sydney and to what was reported to have been said there by Mr Imai of Nippon Steel Corporation who, amongst other things, was critical, so it appears, of Australia's high costs and growing reputation for unreliability as an exporter? Can the Deputy Prime Minister tell the House the implications for the future prosperity of this country of increases in costs in our export industries, particularly iron and coal, and the increase in our growing reputation for unreliability as an exporter?
Mr ANTHONY-I have not seen the actual report but it has been brought to my attention that concern was expressed by some of the Australians at the conference about the possibility of declining imports by Japan of our iron ore and coal. I think one has to recognise the realities of the situation in that the Japanese steel industry looks like going through its lowest production year for the last 11 years. This is because of both lower consumption in Japan and lower export possibilities. That is affecting our sales of iron ore from Western Australia and coking coal from the eastern States. What Australia has been advocating in making representations to Japan is that

1158 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Questions without Notice

there should be a sharing of any decline in the imports ofraw materials. We have developed a very substantial iron and coal exporting industry in parallel with the growth of the Japanese steel industry. If there are any reversals we would want to see the same equitable proportion going to Japan as we have traditionally had.
At the Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee meeting that we had recently I made the point very cogently that we did not want to see our percentage share of the market being lost. Traditionally we have had about 48 per cent of the iron ore market. It is a bit lower than that this year and we would like to see that picked up. Traditionally, we have been getting from 50 per cent to 55 per cent of the coking coal market. So concerned is Western Australia about the matter that its Minister for Resources Development was in Japan only last week pointing out that if Western Australia were to get any lesser share of the market it would seriously jeopardise the economic operations of its iron ore exports.
The Premier of New South Wales is also very concerned about the matter. At the moment he is in Japan and will be making similar representations. I think the greatest damage that has been done to our reputation over the last year was caused by the surge of industrial disputes and problems. They led to shipping delays. Fortunately in New South Wales there has been some reprieve from that situation. The long waiting time, resulting in heavy demurrage paid on ships off Newcastle and Port Kembla, has been eased. There has been a responsible response from the unions as a result of discussions between governments and the industry. I am hoping that the unions will recognise how important it is that from now on they maintain the orders that they have; that they try to reinstate the reliability of Australia as a dependable exporter. I cannot emphasise that enough. At present, when there are difficult export circumstances around the world, Australia has to struggle to its utmost to maintain its competitive position, and reliability plays an important part.
TAX DODGERS
Mr JOHN BROWN-Did the Prime Minister say in a speech in Adelaide last Sunday week that all tax dodgers had to get out of the Liberal Party? Have any of them left yet? When, if ever, is the Prime Minister going to direct the Treasurer and other Ministers to dismiss one notorious tax dodger from the seven discretionary and lucrative public offices that this Government has bestowed upon him?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-What I have said on this issue has been perfectly plain. I have indicated on more than one occasion that the Government is going to pursue those who have profited from bottom-of-the-harbour schemes with all the force of the law that we can command. A special prosecutor is being established and that legislation will be introduced into the Parliament. I have also indicated that if people who have benefited from those kinds of schemes are within the Liberal Party, I would prefer them to be outside it.
VIETNAMESE IMMIGRATION
Mr JARMAN-Can the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs advise what progress has been made with the Vietnamese authorities concerning the processing of people for migrant entry from that country?
Mr HODGES-At the outset I should point out to the House that the orderly departure program of migrants from Vietnam is distinctly different from the refugee program that we have been pursuing for a number of years. I am pleased to report to the House that officers of my Department have commenced the processing of some 450 people in Ho Chi Minh City for migrant entry out of a total of approximately 6,000 people who have been sponsored in Australia. I point out to the House also that the cost of passage of these people will have to be borne by the migrants or by their sponsors in Australia. This is distinct from the refugee program, under which the costs of the passage are borne by the Government. If current progress is maintained I expect the first arrivals within the next two to three months. These people come under the Family Migration Program and are being sponsored by Australians in exactly the same way as are people coming from any other part of the world. It is interesting to note that the present position has been reached after four years of negotiations with the Vietnamese Government.
ORGANISED CRIME
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Minister for Administrative Services to the Minister's participation in a television program on Channel 9 on 9 May last, within a very short time of this House completing its autumn sittings. I ask the Minister whether he said in the course of that interview that he had evidence that State politicians and businessmen were involved in organised crime and, further, that organised crime was involved in drug trafficking, terrorism, international money dealing, arms trafficking and corruption of police and public officials? Did he further say in the

Questions without Notice

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1159

course of the interview that he could have used at least five sitting days in Parliament to have a real fling at a couple of people or governments? In view of the fact that Parliament is back in session and has been for three weeks I now ask: When does the Minister propose to make a statement indicating the nature of the evidence that he has, the identity of the politicians to whom he referred and the details of drug trafficking, international money dealing, arms trafficking and corruption of police and public officials?
Mr NEWMAN-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition is really tempting me. If he needs any evidence or any description of the things which he just detailed I think he should go to chapter 10 of the report of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union which we released last night and he will see exactly what I am getting at. But if the honourable member wants me to have a fling at a couple of people I will tell him what I had in mind. In this place over the last couple of weeks we have had allegations by the Leader of the Opposition and the people behind him that somehow there has been a dereliction of duty by Ministers on this side of the House, that they should have known certain things that were going on in departments. I ask the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to consider this point: The Premier of New South Wales, Mr Wran, should be well questioned about his position in the expected appointment of a Commissioner of Police which fortunately did not happen. Mr Wran should be asked why that was going to happen. Did he know about the activity of the man in question? Did he sanction it? Did he choose that man? If they are the sorts of things the honourable member wants me to have a fling at, there it is. I think they are reasonable questions to ask the Government of New South Wales. They are certainly reasonable questions to ask Mr Wran.
GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY
Mr ADERMANN-I preface my question to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security by pointing out that unemployment benefits are not available to students of tertiary institutions during recesses. Is the Minister aware that the buildings and the campus at Griffith University in Queensland have been required and appropriated for the Commonwealth Games activities? Is it a fact, therefore, that the academic year ends at Griffith University during this month of September, over two months earlier than normal, and the university will not be reopening until the end of February next year? Is this an inordinately longer recess than was comprehended by the

guidelines? Will the Minister, perhaps iIi conjunction with the Minister for Education, consider the special circumstances of continuing students at Griffith University who complete their academic year in September and do not commence studies again until February and who are for that whole time ineligible for unemployment benefits?
Mr WILSON-I state in response to the honourable member's question that I will make inquiries into the implications of that decision. I think that the circumstances for those students who may have a longer summer vacation because of the Commonwealth Games are really no different from those of students attending universities where the year is in accordance with the normal pattern and not interrupted by the Commonwealth Games. I will, however, look at the implications of the matter by referring it to my colleague in another place. I think that their circumstances are no different from those of other students. In fact, they would have an opportunity, as many students do, to seek vacation work of one sort or another to supplement the income they may be receiving from other sources.
AUDITOR-GENERAVS REPORT ON DAIRY REBATES
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question. I refer to a statement to this House almost a year ago, on 29 October 1981 to be precise, by the Minister for Primary Industry in which that Minister said that he was directing the Auditor-General to carry out a full investigation of the scandal on rebates paid by the Australian Dairy Corporation on skim milk sales to an overseas corporation. Has the Prime Minister noted that the Auditor-General in his annual report tabled yesterday discloses that he completed this investigation and sent the report to the Minister for Primary Industry almost five months ago, on 27 April this year? Why has the Government not tabled this report in Parliament? Is it because the Government is gravely embarrassed by its findings, particularly as they concern the Minister for Primary Industry's administration of his Department?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Minister is opening a Cattlemen's Union conference in Mackay today. He will be here tomorrow. I suggest that the Leader of the Opposition address his question to him then.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE FEDERATED SHIP
PAINTERS AND DOCKERS UNION
Mr CONNOLLY-Has the Prime Minister received any communication from the Royal

1160 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Questions without Notice

Commissioner, Mr Costigan, regarding purported quotations by the Leader of the Opposition from unpublished volumes of the reports of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union? lf so, is he in a position to indicate the nature of the communication?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As a result of the debate in Parliament yesterday and also as a result of things that were said outside it, there was a clear assumption by many people, a clear assumption by the media-by the Courier-Mail, the Australian and a number of others-that three knights had been named in the unpublished documents of the Costigan Royal Commission. That was the clear assumption that they made. One has only to read the reports to know that that was so. lf one does read what the Leader of the Opposition said in the Parliament yesterday, it would seem to be very clear that he intended to give that impression. Whether his words are open to more than one interpretation is another matter, but it would seem very plain that he intended to give that impression and that impression was drawn by the media in very plain and stark terms.
The Leader of the Opposition at one point yesterday quite directly said that we have to wait until the unpublished volumes are published and then somebody who has been elevated in a certain place will be found to be embarrassing in certain quarters. He had earlier used the terms 'elevated'--
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. It is a simple matter for the Prime Minister to have before him page 1085, column 1, paragraph 1 of the Hansard record of yesterday's debate. There is no reason or justification for his misstating facts.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. The Leader of the Opposition is not taking a point of order. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is quite unable to take it and continually interrupts, as we know. Let me read the words so that honourable members can again see what implications are drawn from those words. He said:
What happens when we discover the identity of the three eminent 'gentlemen'-I use the word 'gentlemen' rather loosely-who, as their reward for services to society, have been elevated to the peerage of the realm, who are well known as being involved in organised crime and who are making huge fortunes in this country? I do not have to identify them. They are well known to the Press Gallery. They are well known to the police, who have conveyed their identities to me.

The Minister for Administrative Services had something to say about that today. The Leader of the Opposition went on to say:
The Government is stung to retort. Let it retort on this: When the two unpublished volumes of the Costigan Royal Commission report are produced there will be some very embarrassed people very near the Premier of Queenslandpeople who have been elevated-
Again, that word 'elevated'-
and who have waxed profitably as a result of the favour from the State Government in Queensland are some of the names we will hear about.
There is only one implication that journalists could fairly draw from that, and many of them did draw it, as the newspapers and media have indicated quite clearly through this morning.
Mr Mildren-But is it true?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Someone interjected 'But is it true'. That again is the nature of this Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition, in saying what he did and in allowing people to come to the conclusions that they did, was quite plainly smearing a whole class, and falsely smearing a whole class-the class of people who are knights of the realm, whether under the imperial honours list orunder the Order of Australia.
I come now to the letter Mr Costigan wrote to me this morning. It was as a result of a request from an officer of my Department in relation to the unpublished volumes, or for that matter the published volumes, of his report. The letter states:
My dear Prime Minister, I have been asked by an officer of your Department to indi-
cate whether in any of the confidential volumes of my reports there are mentioned any knights in Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane or elsewhere.
As you will understand from my letter dated 6 September it is my firm view that the details of those reports should not be made public either by way of tabling in the Pariiament or by piecemeal disclosure. Consistent with that view I believe there are dangers in responding to individual requests of this kind.
Nonetheless I think it appropriate that I should indicate in this case that there are no such knights mentioned.
The abuse of Parliament by the Leader of the Opposition is disgraceful. He knew how the journalists, the Press Gallery, would draw implications from what he said yesterday. He allowed it to run. He allowed it to be reported. Now he says that what he said yesterday was false. The Leader of the Opposition is totally beneath contempt.
VISA FOR DR BARRY SPITZ
Mr MAHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. Has a visa been granted to Dr Barry Spitz, an American expert in tax avoidance, to enter Australia for one-day teach-ins on tax havens, et

Questions without Notice

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1161

cetera, in Perth, Melbourne and Sydney during the month of November?
Mr HODGES-I am unable to answer with any accuracy the question from the honourable member for Lowe. I will undertake to provide him with an answer before the day is out.
AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY IN BEIRUT
Mr BRADFIELD-I ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs: In view of the now changed situation in Lebanon and the welcome cessation of hostilities in Beirut, can the Minister provide this Parliament with details of any plans to reopen the Australian embassy in that city?
Mr STREET-The Government is keeping under review the question of reopening the Australian embassy in Beirut. The successful completion of the withdrawal of the Palestine Liberation Organisation from Beirut is certainly a major achievement and it will go a long way to restoring the effective authority of the Government of Lebanon. It will be appreciated by the House, though, that the Government would not wish to reopen the embassy in Beirut until the security situation there is acceptable. An officer of my Department visited Beirut last week. He has reported on that visit and hIs report currently is being examined.
Mr SPEAKER-I call for presentation of papers by Ministers.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, with respect, I know the usual procedure but I think it is more appropriate that I respond to some of the misrepresentation that took place at Question Time given the volatility of its presentation and the distortion of fact which was explicit in it.
Mr SPEAKER-I will call the honourable gentleman in a moment.
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Department of Science and Technology for 1981-82.
QUEEN'S FELLOWSHIPS AND MARINE RESEARCH ALLOCATIONS ADVISORY
COMMITTEE
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report prepared by the Queen's Fellowships and Marine Research Allocations Advisory Committee on grants

approved for 1981-82 under the Marine Sciences and Technologies Research Grants Scheme.
LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING INSTITUTE
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)-Pursuant to section 215 of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 I present the final report of the Legislative Drafting Institute. The report covers the period 1 July 1981 to 8 December 1981.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr SPEAKER-Does the Leader of the Opposition claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr Hayden-On many occasions.
Mr SPEAKER-Does he wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr Hayden-Many.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I will deal with the thinner allegations which were appropriately made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) because they will take less time to dispose of. In a rather convoluted and painful way--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will cease to comment and make clear where the misrepresentation is.
Mr HAYDEN-The Prime Minister sought to claim by flimsy assertion that yesterday in the House I directly associated three unnamed people who had been elevated to the peerage-I acknowledge that I should have said they had been elevated to knighthoods-to findings in the Costigan report.
Mr Hodgman-You did.
Mr HAYDEN-I can believe that the Minister honestly believed that because he suffers from dyslexia.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition should ignore the interjection. The Minister for the Capital Territory will remain silent.
Mr HAYDEN-I was discussing the report. I said:
The report talks about only one promoter. What happens when we come to Sydney and Melbourne which are the main focuses of the organisation of this sort of tax evasion?
It would take an extraordinary effort of dexterity to claim that there was in any wayan explicit involvement or attempted association between my references to these three unnamed people and the findings of the Costigan report. In any event, I will not waste time on it. At a Press conference immediatelyafter--

1162 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Personal Explanations

Mr Newman-Mr Speaker, I take a point of Order. If the Leader of the Opposition is to quote what he said I ask him to quote further what is recorded at page 1085 of yesterday's Hansard.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr HAYDEN-One is always intimidated when the intellectual force of the Liberal Party is brought to bear. In any event, the only newspaper I noted this morning-I am not disputing that there may have been others-that had a wrong reference ~as the Australian and that had only a wrong headline. The story was accurate.
An incident having occurred-
Mr SPEAKER-When the House comes to order we will deal with the matter. The Minister for Administrative Services will apologise to the House.
Mr NEWMAN-Mr Speaker, I apologise.
Mr Young-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. In a period of 24 hours you have dismissed a person from this side of the House for quoting the Treasurer (Mr Howard) as calling the McCabe-Lafranchi report a stunt. In the case of a Minister who throws papers across the desk and spills glasses of water while the Leader of the Opposition is on his feet all you ask for is an apology. Quite frankly, you are like a referee playing with the team all the time. You are supposed to be impartial.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. Unless honourable members on the Opposition benches remain silent I cannot--
Mr Dawkins-Why should we listen to you?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent. The honourable member for Holt was named not for what he said but for his continuing to interject after I had warned him to cease. What he said had no relevance. The Minister for Administrative Services behaved in an unparliamentary fashion, and I called upon him to apologise. He has done so. I do not propose to take the matter any further.
Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Assault is not misconduct. Yesterday you refused to allow the opportunity-
Government members interjecting--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members on the Government benches will remain silent.
Mr Scholes-I repeat: There was recently a case in Victoria of assault on the police where a person grabbed a lapel, so assault does not have to be physical. The throwing of books at a person is assault. Mr Speaker, you have said that that is a

matter on which you will accept an apology. But when the Leader of the House asked that the honourable member for Holt be given the opportunity to apologise yesterday, which he may have been prepared to do, you refused. There is a double standard involved. The Minister, who is responsible for law and order, is acting like a thug.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Uren-I take a further point of order. Mr Speaker, you may recall that during Question Time I kad to draw to your notice that you failed to ask the Minister to withdraw until a point of order was taken.
Mr SPEAKER-Correct.
.Mr Uren-That was the first bad error that he made, because he used one of the most unparliamentary terms an honourable member can use in this House. Further, his behaviour in throwing newspapers in the violent way in which he did it--
Government members interjecting--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members on the Government benches will remain silent.
Mr Uren-I believe the Speaker should have taken certain action. We are going through very difficult times and it seems to me that the Speaker of this House is certainly leaning to the Government. He is a Liberal by name and he is certainly a part of the Government. He is not carrying out the proper parliamentary function of being the Speaker of this House.
Mr SPEAKER-The House will make its judgment and I stand by the judgment of the House. I indicate to the honourable member for Reid that I ignore his offensive remarks to me. It is open to the honourable member for Reid to take action which I have advocated since I have become Speaker, that is, to adopt the system adopted at Westminster. If the honourable gentleman will support that, there is opportunity to do it. I call the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, the Minister for law and order, on his performance today, is an incorrigible delinquent but at least he is able to maintain the high standards established by the Liberal Party through the traditions of the Fraser Government.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition has had my indulgence under the Standing Orders to make a personal explanation in which he should state where he has been misrepresented and the correction. I ask him to do so.

Personal Explanations

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1163

Mr HAYDEN-If we can somehow bridge the diversion without my going over the points I was making, if other newspapers have a wrong lead or interpretation similar to that which I saw in the Australian. they too will get a correction, as the Australian did early this morning. However, there is no justification for any error. Apart from a clear reading of the parliamentary record putting beyond any dispute that there was no reference, implicit or explicit, to the Costigan report in the terms in which I discussed this matter, it was made quite abundantly clear at a Press conference I conducted at about 4.10 p.m. in my office in Parliament House at which a large number of media people were present. I do not intend to waste time on that silly sort of distraction with the Prime Minister who seeks to become the sort 'of quintessential man of public decency, a role the public would not recognise, I am sure, in all of this.
I want to go on to the statement of the Minister for Administrative Services in which he said a couple of things. He referred to a letter from, I think, the Police Commissioner quoting my statement about people who have been elevated to the peerage of the realm. In case there is a semantic quibble there, I say that it was clearly a mistake to refer to 'peerage of the realm'. That refers to people who have been appointed as barons or whatever. I meant to refer to knights of the realm. I do not want to waste time on that point but I clarify it in case there is a semantic quibble in that regard about which the police are waffling. I did not use the word 'briefing' in my statement. I said: 'They are well known to the police who have conveyed their identities to me'.
There are a few things that have to be said about this matter. The Minister for Administrative Services may recall with some embarrassment when I jolt his memory about a conversation that he and I had on the front bench on the Government side of this House after the dinner break one night in the last session. I will come back to that in a minute. It is declared that I have not been to the Australian Federal Police headquarters. I mention in passing that on more than one occasion senior police officers, and not just members of the Federal Police, have mentioned this matter to me. I think honourable members will recall my past association with the police force and the fact that I maintain links with people who when I served in the police force were junior but who now hold senior positions. I also have a fairly friendly relationship with interstate police officers at a fairly senior level. If there is any quibble as to whether I have been to the Federal Police headquarters here, I merely draw attention to a letter sent to me

on 7 July 1981 from the training division of the Federal Police. It was an invitation to dine informally with members of the Australian Federal Police officers course. Members of the Federal Police and of the State police forces were present on that occasion. I met a number of them. On that occasion, as had happened on earlier occasions elsewhere and as has happened on other occasions subsequently, this matter was raised with me.
Now, the Minister for Administrative Services pretends that there is oblivion in his mind in relation to this matter. I suggest that it exists in relation to many other matters; there would be no debate about that on either side of the Parliament but I put that matter to one side. I remind the Minister that one night in the last session in this Parliament I crossed the chamber and sat with him on the front bench. I said to him that senior officers of various police forces, including his own from time to time, had been mentioning to me the names of some fairly eminent titled people from the corporate sector who were involved in organised crime. I mentioned their names. I mentioned the three names which were given to me by the people I met at the Federal Police officers' dinner. I will tell the House what the Minister said. In relation to one of those names he said: 'I have heard about that person. We have kept an eye on him but we have not been able to get anything on him. We are very suspicious of him but it is very hard to pin him'. That is what the Minister said in this House. If the Minister quibbles about matters of this nature being raised, if he wants to condemn with contumely the use of anonymity, and I think anonymity is proper in these casesthe matter is well understood-let me remind him of an article in the Canberra Times of 10 May this year in which he was quoted directly. The article states:
Asked if there were 'respectable, reputable businessmen mixed up in organised crime in Australia,' Mr Newman said, 'Of course there are, and they have become so entrenched they have organised themselves so that they are well safeguarded from the normal thing we have been used to in this country . . .
I do not think that the pot ought to be hurling bricks anywhere.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr NEWMANYes, I do, most definitely.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr NEWMAN-I have no recollection whatsoever of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr

1164 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Personal Explanations

Hayden) ever mentioning three names to me in a conversation. The detail which he gave of the alleged conversation-the fact that he can produce that out of the hatI think will indicate to everybody in this House that he has a fabulous memory.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is entitled to state where he has been misrepresented and make a correction.
Mr NEWMAN-I hope that I have clarified that point. I have extended an invitation to the Leader of the Opposition which, if accepted, would clear everything up very easily.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now going beyond--
Mr NEWMAN-It is important. It is part of the explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now going beyond a personal explanation.
Mr NEWMAN-I just remind the Leader of the Opposition that there is a policeman he can make all those allegations to now. He should go and do it.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I wish to make a personal explanation, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) today has tried to say that the implications that were drawn from his statements in the Parliament yesterday or in Press conferences outside could not properly be drawn from what he said. A number of highly reputable journalists have drawn those implications. The evidence for that is in what we have seen this morning.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman is entitled to state where he has been misrepresented and make a correction. The issue is not open for debate. There is no question before the House.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition made the point that what I had said in response to a question was inaccurate. In that I have been very plainly misrepresented because what I said was totally accurate.
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I want to know where the Prime Minister has been personally misrepresented.

Mr SPEAKER-He has just stated that. The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat.
Mr Uren-The trouble is, that I find it very hard--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I find it very hard from your interpretation.
Mr SPEAKER-The Prime Minister is entitled to state where he has been misrepresented.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, I was misrepresented on the basis that the Leader of the Opposition said it was not possible to draw the implications from his remarks which I have indicated. He not only did that but also he repeated the remarks in Parliament House this morning.
Mr Robert Brown-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The implications were drawn by Mungo MacCallum in 'The legislators'- -
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I call the honourable member for Hunter.
Mr Robert Brown-Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is obviously trifling with the House and trifling with you. He has not indicated the way in which he has been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The point is proved by a report from Wallace Brown who wrote:
Three Australian knights have been named in unpublished Costigan reports as being involved in organised crime, according to the Federal Opposition Leader, Mr Hayden.
Mr Robert Brown-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The honourable member for Hunter wishes to take a point of order.
Mr Robert Brown-I think the Prime Minister should indicate the way in which he has been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-He has just done that.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I would like to follow up with the same sort of indulgence that you, peculiarly, are able to extend to that side of the House.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no need for that sort of remark.

Personal Explanations

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1165

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I think we are moving to the point where we have to move something against your--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member may move whatever he chooses to move. He may do it whenever he chooses to do it.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, do not worry; you do not have to invite us. I am suggesting that we are a cigarette paper away from it.
Mr SPEAKER-Perhaps the honourable gentleman should climb over the cigarette paper and move his motion. I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that I am exercising a proper role to the best of my ability. If he chooses to believe that that is inadequate, he is entitled to take any action he chooses. But he is not entitled to continually make defamatory references to me.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I repeat what I said earlier. I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman claims to have been misrepresented he is entitled to make a personal explanation. He may proceed. He should state where he has been misrepresented.
Mr HAYDEN-The whole thrust of the Prime Minister's attack against me is that he is presenting what he believes I meant to say as distinct from what I actually said. If there is any doubt about what I actually said, it would have been removed beyond any scintilla of doubt at the Press conference at 4.10 p.m. in the Press Gallery. I see among the many people there a Mr John Lombard. He was the man who asked me a question as to whether the three knights referred to were referred to on the basis of their being mentioned in the Costigan report. I said: 'No, absolutelynot'.
Mr Sinclair-What did you say to the House yesterday?
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister for Defence will remain silent.
Mr HAYDEN-There can be no justification for that sort of misrepresentation. Of course, the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) is particularly wealthy. He has a vault full of pennies all lifted from the eyes of dead men over a long time.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition--
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. I did not hear the exact words used by the Leader of the Opposition. I ask the Leader of the Opposition to reflect on whether he wishes to

withdraw the words he used in relation to the Minister for Defence. I did not hear them. It is a matter for the Leader of the Opposition to decide whether he should withdraw them.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, no, I shall not withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition is making a personal explanation.
Mr HAYDEN-The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) displays a formidably convenient forgetfulness of memory. By his own words he brands himself as a person who cannot be believed in this House. He would recall clearly the discussion we had in which he confirmed that he was aware that the Commonwealth and State police forces were watching certain titled gentlemen in this community, and one in particular. The essence of what he said was that they were too difficult to nail. They were too slippery and too clever. That is what Costigan says in his report. It is very difficult to get them. But he implicitly acknowledged that what I was saying was absolutely correct, and he explicitly acknowledged in general terms that that is so in the Canberra Times of 10 May, when he stated:
Of course there are respectable, reputable businessmen mixed up in organised crime in Australia.
If it is wrong to make these references with the use of some anonymity on our part, why is it any less wrong for this man, this aberrant delinquent who puts on his Napoleon cap and marches in front of a police parade each morning pretending he is a man of power and authority when he is regarded as a fool--
Government members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I do not propose to call any honourable member for the continuation of the House until the House comes to order and remains in order. I remind the House that we are at the point in the proceedings where honourable members are entitled to make a personal explanation if they have been misrepresented. On this occasion the issues about misrepresentation are highly charged political issues, and I think that personal explanations should come to an end now, otherwise the matter will be debated continuously.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Membership
Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from the Government Whip that he has nominated Mr I. M. D. Cameron to be a member of the Standing

1166 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Unemployment

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs in place of Mr Robinson.
UNEMPLOYMENT
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's out-of-hand and counter-productive rejection of the ACTU proposals for attempting constructively to address the problem of unemployment in this country.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.59)-Mr Speaker, in the atmosphere of last week's growing public outcry against the Government's reprehensible conduct in respect of the tax avoidance industry, which had been so starkly revealed in the fourth interim report of Commissioner Costigan, there may have been a tendency to overlook another disastrous illustration of why the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Government are no longer entitled to the respect and confidence of the people of this country. On Thursday and Friday of last week the Australian Council of Trade Unions held a federal unions conference, and out of that two-day conference there emerged a resolution of historic significance. I remind the House that such a conference of federal trade unions conducted by the ACTU between biennial congresses is the most representative way of testing the will of the trade union movement in this country. Out of that conference there emerged a resolution which I say is deserving of earnest consideration by the Government. I ask members of the House to bear in mind precisely what was said in that resolution which, following the federal unions conference was endorsed by the Executive of the ACTU. In particular I ask that the first paragraph of the resolution be borne clearly in mind. The trade union movement of Australia, so assembled, stated:
The causes of unemployment are manifold and as recognised in policy are not capable of simple solution. The following proposal does not pretend to be a panacea for all our economic problems nor will it create by itself full employment.
Right at the outset of that resolution which was passed by the federal unions conference and subsequently endorsed that day by the Federal Executive of the ACTU was a responsible statement starting off with the proposition that the causes of unemployment are manifold; that the

ACTU did not have all the answers and that it did not pretend to put forward a panacea in regard to this matter. Let me read further from what the ACTU, so assembled, said in respect of this fundamentally important matter. It also acknowledged in its resolution the significance in part of some things that are contained in the Budget. In other words, it was not simply trying to condemn the Federal Government totally out of hand, saying that nothing of relevance had been done. Indeed, the resolution stated:
The income tax changes announced in the 1982-83 Budget satisfy the wage and salary earners demand for tax indexation and as such they alleviate the need for unions to build income tax increases into claims for cost of living adjustments.
Again that is a thoroughly responsible and constructive approach by that assembling of the Australian trade union movement. It recognised that what happened in the Budget in respect of tax indexation met that part of its claim. As I said at the outset, there is first of all a responsible recognition that the trade union movement did not have all the answers and that the causes of unemployment were complex. Secondly, the ACTU pointed out that it took positive account of what the Government had done in the Budget. It went on to make very specific proposals about what could be done, on its part as well as by the Government, co-operatively, to try to deal with the problems confronting this country in general and in respect of unemployment in particular. It said:
We do not believe that the trade union movement can be expected to make the only contribution and for this reason there should be a collective response involving: (a) forgoing half the benefits of tax indexation (which means $4 per week at average weekly earnings level).
The ACTU went on to refer to the other matters which would be involved in such a comprehensive package. I again remind you, Mr Speaker, and the House of the context. The ACTU asserted that it did not have all the answers and that the causes of unemployment were complex; it recognised positively the contribution that the Budget has made in respect of tax indexation-that that had met the ACTU's part of the negotiations that it had had with the Government-and from that totally positive and responsible approach it went on to make a specific proposal about how the ACTU and the rest of the community could make a sacrifice by forgoing half the amount of tax indexation to create a national employment fund which would be directed, on the part of the ACTU which had made the sacrifice and the re.st of the community, to helping those in the community who were currently unemployed. That was the decision-an historic decision-that was taken by the ACTU on Friday of last week. The

Unemployment

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1167

whole context of the debate and the resolution showed on the part of the ACTU realism, responsibility and flexibility.
What was the response by this Government to that decision and attitude of the ACTU? The most convenient way of referring to the expressed reaction of the Government is to go to the Age of last Saturday. Under the heading 'Fraser scorns unions' job deal' we have a report on the reaction of the Government. The article stated:
The ACTU's offer to give up half the Budget tax cuts in return for a big job creation scheme was rejected by the Federal Government yesterday, only hours after it was approved by more than 150 unions.
Let us look at the very specific language of the rejection made by this Government. The article stated:
The acting Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, Mr Brown, described the plan as a 'mild form of lunacy', hare-brained and absurd.
This was the reaction of the then Acting Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations to this positive proposal involving a sacrifice of half of the indexation cuts. The response by the Acting Minister was that the plan was a mild form of lunacy, hare-brained and absurd. If we are properly to understand the hypocrisy and the recklessness of this Government do not let me immediately rely on my saying on behalf of the Opposition what judgments should be made about this sort of response by the Gov\!rnment. Let me briefly refer to the range of editorial reaction to this response of the Government. Firstly, I go to the Australian Financial Review of Monday, 6 September. It stated:
Instead of attacking the employment creation plan put forward by the Australian Council of Trade Unions last week it would do the Government and others more credit if they were prepared to realise how far the majority of uniolls in the ACTU have moved towards a rational approach to Australia's economic problems.
The article went on:
It is one of the great political faults of the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, that his instinct to kick a political head when he sees it prevents him from realising how far the ACTU has in fact moved towards genuine social compromise in the scheme put forward last week.
With an election looming in the not too distant future it is probably not surprising that the Prime Minister should not be willing to concede that the ACTU has travelled a long way along the path of reasonable compromise . . . If the Prime Minister were genuinely interested in consensus in the matter of wages policy he ought to recognise how far the ACTU has moved.
Let us look at the Canberra Times of the same date. What was its reaction to the plan? It stated:

The Government has chosen to characterise it as "lunacy", and to reiterate that wage increases are the root cause of unemployment. That is the sort of simplistic rhetoric that gets us nowhere.
The article went on to state:
- . . it has been hasty in dismissing it out of hand. That looks like a slap in the face to people prepared to drop their customary, hard adversarial role and try for real negotiation. It could lead to a very damaging standoff.
The Canberra Times said that the Government should accept:
- . . that the ACTU has offered a genu 'y useful set of proposals for negotiation . . .
We come to what yesterday's Age had to say. It stated:
The insulting way in which the Fraser Government rejected the ACTU's economic plan on Friday permits only one conclusion: that the Government is now more concerned about election tactics than economic management . . . There has been a growing recognition on all sides that Australia must learn from the consensus policies of the countries that have weathered the recession best . . .
In these circumstances, one would have thought the Government would recognise-as anyone concerned with the issue must recognise-that the ACTU's proposal was a very bold step towards such a consensus . . . This is a big and courageous step for the ACTU to make, and it deserved a warm reception from the Government . . . The Acting Minister, Mr Brown, consulted Mr Fraser, who saw it as merely a threat to the Government's campaign strategy for an early election.
The Age went on to say:
On his leader's instructions, Mr Brown not only rejected the offer, but did so in such a derisory manner as to suggest to the ACTU that it should not bother in future.
The editorial continued:
This is an abysmal way tomn an economy.
It concluded:
- . . the Fraser Government has slammed the door on the union moderates seeking consultation. By virtually telling them not to come back, it has ;.ven carte blanche to unions with industrial muscle to get what they can, while those lacking muscle fall behind.
In respect of the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee), who is at the table, the Age had this to say:
The unfortunate Mr Macphee may as well extend his holidays. There seems little point in negotiating an agreement when your principal wants a confrontation.
There is the wide range of reaction from the Australian Financial Review, the Canberra Times and the Age condemning the Government. What they said and indeed what we say here is not that the ACTU proposals are necessarily perfect and without the possibility of criticism, nor is it suggested that the ACTU would make that claim itself. What was universally recognised in those editorials was that here was a really constructive, positive approach along the road to consensus, a

1168 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Unemployment

recognition on behalf of the trade union movement that wages can play some part in the creation of economic problems including unemployment. They recognised on the part of the trade union movement an openness, a frankness, a holding out of the hand and saying: 'Look, we know that what we do can have some impact upon what happens to other people. It can have an adverse impact. What are we doing? We are acknowledging that and acknowledging that part of the Government's Budget was helpful in regard to the tax indexation claim. We are positively saying that we are prepared to forgo a half of the tax indexation that has been offered. Why? We believe that in that way we, as a trade union movement, can try constructively to do something to help those who are unemployed'. What do the unions get for their pains? They get this condemnation that they are engaged in lunacy and harebrained approaches. Is it any wonder that the Age, the Australian Financial Review and the Canberra Times condemn this Government and say that it was putting electoral advantage and perceived political advantage in front of the proper management and conduct of industrial relations of this country?
I say to my friend the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) at the table-I use those words 'my friend' advisedlythat the time has come when he must stand up and be counted on this issue. Is he going to repudiate publicly this offensive nonsense which, by general consensus, is seen to run counter to the best interests of this country? I simply cannot believe that the Minister endorses the approach of the Prime Minister and of the Minister for Communications, who on this occasion readily filled the role of malleable monkey for the organ grinder from Nareen. We had hoped that those sorts of days were behind us when the honourable member for Stirling (Mr Viner) was dismissed from this post. We have a tragedy in this country of high and rising unemployment which is an economic and a social disaster. The trade union movement, not necessarily with the perfect approach, has held out its hand in constructive cooperation. It is prepared to forgo half its tax indexation increases. The very least the Government should have done was to say: 'We welcome this constructive approach. We do not agree with all that you are putting, but we are prepared, in the interests of this country, to sit down and talk with you'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (3.12)-The relationship between the Government and the Australian Council of Trade Unions just cannot be looked at in isolation in terms of the events of one week. I remind the House of the fact that on 7 July a tripartite conference was held at the request of the ACTU, agreed to by the Government with the employers, to consider what ought to be in the forthcoming Budget and what the interests of both sides of the industrial fence were. The ACTU put some very elaborate and certainly very constructive propositions to us. It actually made public a resume of what had been put on that occasion. In fact, if one drew up a table of what it put and what we have responded to in this Budget one would find that we have actually met all of its principal demands. Its demands did not contain a reference to the kind of so-called national employment fund which it announced last Friday.
Mr Hawke-The Budget did not contain the drought proposal either. You are not prepared to adapt to changing circumstances?
Mr MACPHEE-I am merely trying to be kind to the honourable member for Wills on this occasion. Clearly the drought proposals are the result of a worsening climatic situation; regrettably the unemployment situation has been with us for some time. We on the Government side have said that we do not in any way welcome the high levels of unemployment. We are doing what we can. We have said in many debates in this House, including one a couple of weeks ago, that we are trying to contain and reduce those high levels of unemployment. We sought the support of the ACTU in those measures. The ACTU had two opportunities before the BUdget-the last of them was on 7 july-to put views about employment and unemployment. It did not do so.
What has to be recognised is that the proposition now put by the ACTU, while it has the commendable features that the honourable member for Wills has pointed out, also has the commendable feature that the trade union movement of this country now acknowledges the importance of helping to curb unemployment and create employment. It also acknowledges that while it has not got all the answers and certainly is not fully responsible, it does bear some responsibility for improving that picture. It has that advantage and I can acknowledge that.
Mr Hawke-Do you repudiate what your Acting Minister said?
Mr MACPHEE-I will come to that in a moment. The practical observation which the

Unemployment

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1169

honourable member for Wills chose to ignore is: How does one, three weeks after the Budget is presented, respond to that kind of argument? Is the ACTU, for example, powerful enough to say to its members: 'Sign on the dotted line. Sign away half your tax reduction'? Are those 50 per cent or more of persons in the work force who are not unionised going to have the ACTU speaking for them? Will they say: 'Yes, we are quite happy because there has been a Federal unions meeting and someone has decided on our behalf that we will forgo our tax reductions in the Budget'? What the Acting Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr N. A. Brown) did say and what the honourable member chose to ignore was contained in the last paragraph of the Acting Minister's Press release. It stated:
If the ACTU wishes to have discussions with Government on the proposals it has put forward, then the Government is willing to do so. However, such discussions would need to be on the clear understanding of the importance the Government attaches to wage restraint in present economic circumstances.
The importance of that statement is that as a precondition, as it were, for this kind of national employment fund-a precondition for cooperation, so it seems, reading the ACTU's release-there was a commitment sought from the Government to support the maintenance of real wages. There were several references on the wages policy side to a precondition that the Government must agree to a centralised system of wage fixation which guaranteed indexation of wages. The Government made it clear that in the current economic circumstances that was not on. While I again congratulate the ACTU on getting this far, nevertheless one sees a great deal of vagueness in this quite extensive document. In fact, I have spoken by telephone to the President of the ACTU and said that when he thinks it is useful I would be pleased to have a yarn with him and any of his officials on what the plan means. We are agreed that the most useful thing for him to do now is to go, as he was asked to do by the meeting of last Friday, to the peak councils in the States-the trades and labour councils-and when he has completed that exercise we will have a discussion on what the document means.
I do not presume to quote the President but I think he would acknowledge the difficulty as is illustrated in that famous expression about the ink not being dry. When the Budget has been presented, what the ACTU has now put could not reasonably be entertained by the Government. It is hardly surprising that the recommendations put forward, both administratively and in terms of the principle of the Budget, cannot be accepted. But it is significant that, however belatedly the trade union movement generally, as distinct from some

of its leaders, now acknowledges the seriousness of unemployment, the fact is that to some extent that situation is worsened and has been brought about by some of the actions of some of the militant trade union leaders in respect of excessive wage demands and hours reductions. It is a matter about which they could be concerned and should be concerned.
It is very important too to note that the national employment fund, even if it were feasible to administer, would amount to an extra cost of some $785m. Admittedly this is to be taken away from certain other taxpayers who would believe they need it and whom we believe will use it effectively. The Senior Vice-President of the ACTU puts the number of persons who might be trained under the scheme at only some 40,000 in the next six months and perhaps as many as 120,000 within a year. No government can seriously consider in isolation that sort of proposition as opposed to the care which went into the preparation of this Budget which is aimed, of course, at helping to retain present levels of employment, improve the real disposable income of people and in fact to restore our economic growth.
The ACTU has at last recognised the unemployment situation. Let us not forget that the Australian Labor Party overlooked unemployment in the preparation of its policy for its biennial congress. In fact, both sides of the labour movement have been rather remiss on the question of unemployment whereas the Government has consistently expended increasing sums Budget by Budget on training programs designed to give people a level of skill for permanent employment. It is also worth noting that the Victorian Premier is now reported to be seeking to break some election commitments that he made on employment subsidisation. Whilst I do not know whether he has made a firm statement on this matter, there are reports in today's Press indicating that he is interested in breaking that election commitment. One of the most important aspects of that is that glib statements are made sometimes by trade union officials and Labor politicians about the gravity of unemployment and the fact that somehow or other the Government has to produce a magical answer. I think the ACTU and the Opposition have to recognise that the time for putting these views forward is prior to the preparation of the Budget. Having said that, I certainly will look forward to a detailed discussion with the ACTU on its proposals, to try to put some flesh on the bones and to see how relevant they might be in the preparation of the next year's Budget.

1170 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Unemployment

There is no doubt that the trade union movement has come a long way in recognising the unemployment situation and the fact that there is a link between excessive wage increases or labour costs and unemployment. At this stage I believe it would be irresponsible for us to support the proposition for indexation of real wages. I believe that the ACTU and its members should look ai the benefits that this Budget brings to them on 1 November. They should then make an assessment of what they believe might be done in the next year's Budget. No proposal of this nature was put to us in the tripartite discussions. I do not think that any reasonable person, including the editorialists, can expect the Government now, three weeks after the presentation of the Budget, to respond to a proposition of that nature.
If there was to be a federal union meeting one would have hoped it would have been before the tripartite conference. The date for the tripartite conference was set a good month before it was held and it was set to suit the convenience of the ACTU leadership. The statement by the ACTU on the mechanics of the fund to which reference has been made~indeed, it seems to me that the honourable member for Wills relied solely upon that fund~do not provide detail. They would not provide detail if he were in government trying to administer the fund. I have asked the ACTU when we do have our discussions to spell out what it wants to operate. Certainly as I read it now the Government would have to say to pay-as-youearn taxpayers 'We are going to change our mind
and call back the PAYE scale to take effect on I November'. This would be costly. It would be time consuming. It would mean that many people who are not affiliated with the ACTU and who would not want the ACTU speaking for them would say: 'Wait a minute, the Government is in breach of faith as far as I am concerned'.
The whole proposition is just too silly. The timing is quite absurd. I suggest that the wrath, or sense of frustration, which was felt by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Acting Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations owed itself to that. For the first time, a constructive tripartite discussion was held. All three parties told the Press how constructive and useful it was. The Prime Minister said that he and his Ministers took on board what the ACTU had to say and that its views would be reflected in the Budget. They were very clearly reflected in the Budget. On the night the Budget was brought down it was described as horrible. Three days later the ACTU had to put out a statement which showed, as the honourable member for Wills has acknowledged today, that the Budget had a

number of good features which met things its members were concerned about. It had many good features and very few irritating features the more that members of the ACTU took the time to examine it.
At last Friday's meeting the ACTU produced some idea of a new employment creation fund. That idea was not advanced to us before the Budget, and it is clearly something which requires Budget implementation. It would require a complete rewriting of this Budget if we were to try to cope with it now. The idea has been thought through no better than some of the plans that have come from the ALP over the years for the creation of jobs by subsidisation, without any certainty that people would be employed for any real length of time and not at the expense of other people. No matter how one looks at this proposal, there are many more questions to be asked than are answered in the ACTU's document. I do not believe that it will be able to provide within the next few months a detailed program which would be capable of implementation. I do not believe, in other words, that had the ACTU put the idea to us on 7 July we could have got it into the sort of shape required in time for this Budget. I welcome the fact that the ACTU is concerned at last about the relationship between wage increases and unemployment.
Mr Charles~When is the Government going to do something about unemployment? It has had seven years.
Mr MACPHEE~This Government, through its policies of economic management, which have been referred to in many debates in this House, in terms of employment creation and training for permanent employment has done more than any other government.
Mr Hawke~ You have reduced the funds by 35 per cent in real terms.
Mr MACPHEE~That is not so. There has been a dramatic increase in the funds available for all training and employment programs. I look forward to a serious discussion with the ACTU when it has completed discussions with its trades hall councils. We will then do our best to try to accommodate its latest idea in a practical way in next year's Budget.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (3.27)~ln seconding the discussion of the matter of public importance brought forward by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), it is interesting to note that at last we have had a statement, or at least a few words, from the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) on the subject of employment. There is not much

Unemployment

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1171

doubt from what he said that he does not agree with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), who was acting in his place while he was away having a holiday. To put this matter into perspective, we need to look at some of the things that have happened since the Budget. On 24 August the Prime Minister was asked this question in this House in relation to the Budget:
What does the Budget do that will provide incentives to those making claims for increases in wages, particularly unions, to diminish those claims?
The Prime Minister said:
There is a very substantial incentive in the Budget to moderate wage claims as a result of the totality of the measures that the Government introduced.
The honourable member for Wills indicated that the trade union movement in deliberations at its conference recognised that some of the things that were done in the Budget were of benefit to the union movement. The Prime Minister also said:
I believe it is reasonable, and the Australian Council of Trade Unions has recognised that it is reasonable, to think that this establishes a precondition for wage restraint through the course of this year.
That was said on 24 August, and I started to believe that perhaps the Prime Minister was learning that a consensus approach could work. However, it did not last long. As the honourable member for Wills clearly indicated, on 3 September when the ACTU approached the Government on this matter there was an immediate reaction. The confrontation approach took over while the Minister was absent and another Minister was taking his place. Clearly, the Prime Minister scorned the unions job deal. The Acting Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations described it as a mild form of lunacy, as the honourable member for Wills has said. The immediate reaction of this Government to a genuine attempt to do something about employment problems in this country was to attack it on a confrontation basis. From a few days after the Budget when there was a slight softening of the confrontation approach we went back into it full bore, while the Minister was away.
We are putting forward today the argument that there was an out-of-hand rejection. The honourable member for Wills has clearly indicated that. The statements that were made and the way in which they were reported in the Press were clearly seen by the public and the media in this country as indicating that a sensible proposal put forward for discussion had been rejected out of hand. It was a counter-productive rejection. Either we have a common sense approach in this country in negotiations on wages

and conditions and dealings between governments and unions or we continue with the sorts of confrontation policies we have had for the last seven years, and which are counter-productive. They will not do anything for the stability of the economy in this country. They will not do anything for the problems of unemployment in respect of which the ACTU was trying to put forward proposals. The Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, who is at the table, has told us in statements on the Budget that we can expect unemployment to rise next year to 8 per cent, an increase of 40 per cent to 50 per cent over this year. He announced those figures in speeches following the Budget but when the trade union movement comes together and presents a plan for discussion the Government's approach is a confrontationist counter-productive rejection of the proposal.
The problems of unemployment will not go away. The Minister said that a tripartite conference was held on 7 July so that the unions could sit down with the Government and put their claims before the Budget was brought down. The Government claims that it met the princpal demands, but it completely ignored any proposals on job creation. The Budget has clearly indicated that people will be out of work in greater numbers than ever before. The Government has come forward with no proposals for jobs. It claims that it is doing things for job training. There is not much point in the Government's putting money into job training when it is not prepared to put something towards creating jobs. The trade union movement made a genuine attempt. The union came together and said to the Government: 'We are prepared to put forward a plan whereby $725m of the tax indexation concessions can be used to create employment, to establish a national employment fund.' The Government is completely ignoring that proposal. It is using the work force as a tool for inflation control and doing nothing to counter the effects of unemployment on the families of this nation.
Let me get back to the matter of vital importance. The Minister first of all acknowledges that the proposals have some merit. He congratulated the ACTU on the document. He told us that he has spoken to the ACTU President and that he is prepared to negotiate and talk about employment problems with the trade union movement. What a complete opposite is the Minister's attitude to the initial reaction by the Prime Minister and the Acting Minister, who went to the Prime Minister and got the okay to issue his statement to the Press. Fancy any Minister, the day after a proposition is put forward to a government, saying that it is a

lIn REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Unemployment

mild form of lunacy, hare-brained and absurd! At the end of his Press release the Minister said that perhaps the Government could talk about it. This is the type of approach we have seen for seven years.
It will never do anything for the economy of Australia. If we really want to see the sorts of problems this has created in the past and will create in the future, particularly for this Minister, we only have only to go back to 28 April 1981 and the resignation of the former Minister for Industrial Relations, the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). What he said then is relevant right now. He said:
Two things are relevant. First, effective industrial relations in this country have been put at risk by the undermining of the authority of the responsible Minister.
It was not a bad effort last week of the Prime Minister and his Acting Minister, while the Minister responsible was on holiday for a couple of days, to take the opportunity to undermine him completely. The former Minister continued:
Second, the nation requires a steady and responsible conduct of its affairs, and especially in the extremely significant area of industrial relations. As my predecessor and I have frequently said, it is fundamental that the power of government in the field of industrial relations be used with fine judgement.
I wonder how long it will be before we find the present Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, who is at the table, in the very same position in which this Minister found himself, being undermined by a Prime Minister who is interested only in confrontation and who is not interested in the unemployed of this country. The former Minister went on:
This is especially so in an outmoded system of industrial relations unsuited to the shift of power between capital and labour.
Mark my words, those statements made on 28 April 1981 when another Minister of this Government resigned will definitely come back to the mind of this Minister. I challenge him here and now to repudiate those statements made by the former Minister and I challenge him and other speakers on the Government side, especially the next speaker in this debate, the honourable member for Connor (Mr Tuckey), who as usual is ready to have a go at the unions, to state publicly what this Government's position is going to be. Will he follow the Minister at the table, who presented logic and common sense and said that he intended to speak with the union movement? Or will he argue on the side of the Prime Minister and the Acting Minister who treat this matter as a confrontation contest at all times?
The unemployed of this country, who are estimated by the Minister at the table to be 8 per

cent of the work force this year, are waiting for this Government to come up with a policy. The trade union movement has come forward with a sensible proposal. We have heard the Minister say that he is prepared to talk. We have heard the Prime Minister and the Acting Minister clearly scorn what the trade union movement did. This Government has to make up its mind what its policy on the unemployed is. Does it want confrontation and more problems or will it take a consensus line and talk sensibly to the union movement about the massive problems that come to any country which has 8 per cent unemployment and half a million people who cannot receive ajob or a wage?
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (3.37)-When Albert Monk retired as President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions there was a noticeable shift to place politics ahead of worker benefit in that organisation. The proposal being discussed here today demonstrates how far that movement has proceeded, accelerated no doubt by the success of its now past President in entering this place and being granted speedy if undeserved promotion. On Budget day the ACTU had no compunction in rejecting out of hand and before consideration a Budget which could certainly not be criticised for its generosity to wage earners, in both direct benefits and in support for labour intensive industries such as the building industry. We now find the ACTU promoting impossible and impractical schemes aimed not at improving the lot of its members but also at creating a platform for its past President and his Labor colleagues to attack the Government for not accepting this olive branch grafted to a nettle.
This is not a constructive attempt to address the problems of unemployment in this country. It is a cynical and destructive attempt by the new political hopefuls of the ACTU to promote their personal positions at the cost of Australia and its workers. One newspaper suggests that this proposal was a genuine olive branch. That has been proposed to us today. An olive branch must give one some place to hold when one receives it. The ACTU made sure that there was no such place. What did it offer the public and this Government? Did it offer them a return to the 40-hour week or improved worker productivity and industrial practice? Did it make any proposals at all that might increase Australia's competitive position in world markets, such as simply ensuring that our goods are allowed to leave our ports? No. Did it offer to arrange the immediate opening of the Drayton coal mine with instant and direct creation of 150 jobs? No. Did it promise to stop money-grabbing strikes such as the meat industry

Unemployment

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1173

strike in drought-stricken Victoria? I thought honourable members opposite might be interested in that. No, it did not. Did it promote a policy to guarantee Australian industry and its work force regular supplies of fuel and energy? No. We have at this moment a strike which is denying people jobs, and this proposal is supposed to be about job creation! Ho, ho, ho! What then did it offer? It offered to assume the role of government. So obsessed is the ACTU's executive with playing politicians that it has forgotten completely all the practical and constructive things that a council of trade unions should be doing on behalf of its members.
Mr Hawke-A mid-afternoon circus.
Mr TUCKEY-It is funny that the honourable member for Wills should say that. My concern is that if the shadow Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations should revert to a family tradition and become a clergyman, no doubt the ACTU would then wish to assume the role of God, a position, it would appear, that some members of the Australian Labor Party-in particular the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins)-believe they have attained already. It is also obvious to me that the departure of the previous President has not created an improvement in the ability of the ACTU for economic understanding or for plain arithmetic.
The honourable member for Wills has been proven singularly unimpressive in these fields, second in fact only to his total inability to provide this Parliament and his own party with bold new initiatives or proposals. He became a member of this House with great expectations for creating employment and then he recommended a return to the Regional Employment Development Scheme! He heaps bucketfuls of criticism on the Government but fails to make solutions himself. This shadow for a shadow Minister still believes, as do his colleagues, that two plus two equals seven. What better example than that which appears in this constructive ACTU proposal where it is suggested that by reducing workers' take home pay and consequently their spending power by $4 a week and company profits by some amount not yet specified, the money saved can be used to create extra jobs! New and unproductive jobs maybe; extra jobs never. The proposal is straight out double counting and typical of people who have neither had experience of business nor done manual labour.
Further, whilst I recognise the need to create equity in our taxation system by removing the practice of tax avoidance and evasion, I challenge

completely the ACTU's reference and the Opposition's belief that this transfer of funds from the private sector to the public sector will create extra jobs; nor will any proposal such as the re-establishment of free health services or expanded welfare programs. Money must be provided from somewhere and it is time that the ACTU discovered and informed its members that they-the members-are and will remain the principal source of government revenue, whatever the political colour of the government. We will not improve the standard of living by providing a free service and then reducing wages through tax, and Opposition members can laugh at that. The
ACTU and its past President seem committed to government job creation programs. The past President, of course, tried some direct input during his presidency of the ACTU. I commend him for trying. The notable attempt, of course, was the ACTU's takeover of Bourke's in Melbourne, a veritable workers' co-operative where the loyal union members would flock in their thousands thus improving their standard of living and creatingjobs.

Mr Hawke-We did what your party would never do. We smashed retail price maintenance and saved the public $I,OOOm. You wouldn't object to that.

Mr TUCKEy-it went broke, and the honourable member could not run a grocer's shop.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for O'Connor will resume his seat. I remind honourable members on my left that the honourable members for Wills and McMillan were heard in silence. I ask them to return the courtesy. I call the honourable member for O'Connor.

Mr TUCKEYThe business went broke.

Dr Theophanous-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. This speech, which must be one of the most atrocious that I have ever heard--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)There is no point of order.

Dr Theophanous-.

consists of per-

sonal attacks on all kinds of people and is not a

speech worthy of this Parliament.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Burke will resume his seat.

Mr TUCKEY-Let us get the situation straight; the business failed and that is a fact. I can say that because we know that it is a fact. We do not have to have any innuendo about that. We know who thought it out. What is more, he got it for nothing, and he could not make a success of it then. Nobody went to his store because he did not

1174 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Petitions

have the same compulsion he had with union membership. Let us get down to the point and recognise the simple fact of prosperity. Prosperity was explained by two men who were discussing a successful and self-made businessman. One said: 'Ah, but he has been lucky.' The other said: 'Yes, and the harder he works the luckier he seems to get'. In those words lies the solution to unemployment in Australia. The solution does not lie in reduced wages, higher taxes, free medicine or higher unemployment payments, as proposed in the ACTU document. It lies in increased productivity per dollar paid. It lies in increased hours worked and, in particular, in work carried out for five days a week uninterrupted by strikes. It lies in more production and more exports.
The ACTU can make suggestions about Government policy and at many times it has been welcome to do so. Its responsibility, nevertheless, is to get its own house in order first. Were the ACTU prepared to go down the genuine jobcreation road instead of the Government-bashing road it might discover some of the following information. Yesterday the world spent $40 billion. Yesterday Australia spent $400m, about one per cent of that total world figure. Australia shares only one per cent of world trade and a very much smaller percentage of the labour intensive manufacturing sector. One need only refer to the standards of living that applied in Australia before its present involvement in international trade to realise that world trade is the basis for all employment in Australia today. That being the case, more than 6 million Australians gain employment from one per cent of world trade. As unemployment in Australia now stands below 7 per cent it can be said that an additional 0.07 per cent of world trade could remove all unemployment costs from the Australian taxpayer. Such a small percentage could hardly be measured, even in the present downturn of world trade, and is obviously achievable. It just requires that people get together as Australians and not suggest that one can take a dollar out of one pocket and put it in another pocket to create a job. That is all the ACTU proposal says. It is typical Labor Party economics and it is not worth two bob. Any time we like to look around we can see jobs going out the window because nobody has ever sat down--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.

PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania. Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown, Dr Cass and Mr Fry.
Petitions received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that whereas the current rates of personal income tax are onerous and destructive of personal incentive, particularly since the cessation of income tax indexation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formally call upon the Parliament assembled to legislate such changes to the current taxation law as will-
raise the minimum level at which income tax is first payable to at least $4,500; proportionately increase the figures at which the higher rates of tax attract; allow taxpayers to claim the full amount for each item within the Concessional Expenditure Rebate; and adjust the rates of tax payable so that no higher rate of tax is payable than fifty per cent of income earned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown, Mr Katter and Mr Spender.
Petitions received.
Excise on Wine
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That any sales tax or excise on Australian wine would adversely affect employment in the wine industry, place a disproportionate burden on grapegrowers and ensure a larger future surplus of grapes;
The reduction in the demand for wine will also threaten the existence of many wine producers and reduce the range, quality and variety of wines offered in the market.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will reject any proposal for a sales tax or excise on Australian wine.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett and Mr Wilson.

Petitions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1175

Petitions received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the amount of income permitted to pensioners before the loss of 50 cents in each dollar of pension for each extra dollar of income has not changed since 1972 although the c.P.!, has risen by 161 per cent in that time;
That the amount of income permitted to pensioners before fringe benefits are disallowed has not altered since 1979 although the c.P.1. has risen by 20 per cent in that time; and that pensioners are people who, while employed, paid taxes and contributed to compulsory superannuation schemes.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Increase both the amount of income permitted to pensioners before disallowance of fringe benefits and the amount allowed before the amount of pension received is reduced, to a realistic level; and also link those cut-off points to the c.P.1.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown and Mr Connolly.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of Australia in Parliament as assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia who respectfully sheweth their anger and condemnation at the unrealistic low priority given to children's vacation programmes and other children's services which has resulted in the withdrawal of funds from programmes which provide an essential community service. We protest at the disastrous effects this will have on parents and children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government provide public funding for all children's services including vacation programmes to ensure quality services are available for all children and parents who require it. Further that funds be immediately released to prevent closure of Vacation programmes for the 1981/82 Financial year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown and Mr Coleman.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable Speaker arid Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Ensure that the Government takes immediate action to restore the lost value of Family Allowances and to index them to cover future price rises;
Help single-income families by increasing the dependent spouse rebate to $1392.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
By Mr Coleman and Mr Connolly.
Petitions received.

National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully sheweth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Coleman and Mr Connolly.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The heart-rending loss of homes by home purchasers, due to an expanding holocaust of interest rates caused by, and to quote the manager of a leading bank (26.4.81) 'with the growing competition for savings, depositors are looking for higher interest returns on deposits. In order to retain our depositors and to meet the increased costs payable on deposits and operating expenses; it is necessary to raise income from loans of all types, including House Loans.'
Therefore it becomes transparently clear that the constant edging up of interest rates for investors by banks, lending institutions, and banking consortiums are collectively responsible for the monetary explosion, lack of employment and all that that entails and is causing grave social disruption to hundreds of thousands. Behind it all, the absence of control that is now politically essential in the interest of justice and fair distribution of burden.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your House urge all politicians to unite nationally to do all within their power to reduce interest rates across the board.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Australia Day
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the 26th January, 1788, is the date of first white settlement in Australia, and therefore marks the beginning of modern Australia,
and this event marks the most appropriate date on which to celebrate our national day.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will determine that Australia Day is to be celebrated on the twenty-sixth day of January each year, and that a public

1176 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Petitions

holiday will be declared on that day, regardless of which day of the week is the 26th.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Wine Industry
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) thal wine is a beverage of moderation whose use especially in conjunction with food may be beneficial to the consumer.
(b) that per capita consumption of alcohol in Australia has stabilised at 9.6 litres per head, the same as the average over the past eight years.
(c) that the low retail price of wine in Australia has been brought about by a number of factors including an oversupply of grapes and grape products.
(d) that if the price of wine is increased due to factors outside the control of grape growers, wine makers and retailers, sales of wine will be reduced.
(e) that the consequent fall in the demand for grapes coupled with the reduced wine production will affect employment and incomes, particularly in rural areas.
(f) that Australian brandy continues to lose market share to other spirits.
Your petitioners therefore most humbly pray that the Government consider and appreciate the complexities of the widely-spread Australian Wine Industry and be aware that any Government impost will cause further imbalance between the supply of and the demand for grapes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBurr.
Petition received.
Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian Government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980;
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantage in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants, loans, credit or finance;
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by (i) making unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the ground of sex and marital status and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Marital Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Coleman.
Petition received.

Price of Petrol
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia (electors of the division of Grey) respectfully showeth:
That the recent seeking or granting of increases to the wholesale maximum price of petrol is recognised as an artificial means to enable oil companies to maintain their present profit levels, and the Federal Government to also retain its present high level of petrol excise through parity pricing of our oil, a stealth tax, against the predicted decline of the O.P.E.C. world oil prices.
This artificial tax and price increase imposed upon our oil (Aust. imports only 3 per cent of its oil requirement) by the Federal Government and oil companies, affects the whole of the economic structure of the Australian consumer, commercial and agricultural sectors. The stimulation this tax and price has upon hidden and indirect taxation, far surpasses any tax effect from any other single item essential to the welfare and living standards of the Australian community.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
(I) All maximum wholesale petrol price increases sought or granted be refused or repealed.
(2) a single standard maximum wholesale petrol price for the whole of Australia (city and rural) be established and initially based on March 82 CPI quarter.
(3) Such a wholesale price be fixed for six months then adjusted in parity with pension/benefit increases twice yearly.
(4) Parity pricing to world oil prices be re-adjusted to 50 per cent of O.P.E.C. prices at the December 82 CPI quarter, and to be adjust.ed half-yearly to maintain 50 per cent relativity to world prices.
(5) parity pricing and oil prices be re-introduced into the CPI indexes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Peacock.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:
Members of the Community are concerned and alarmed at the increasing levels of direct and indirect taxation.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the increasingly inequitable distribution of these taxes through the Social Wage.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the apparently uncontrolled increases in interest rates and the shrinking access to loan capital.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the neglect of pension levels and the absence of real relativity with average wages.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at diminishing government spending on health, its consequential effect on the quality, cost and availability of Health Services and the absence of meaningful expenditure for the prevention of disease and injury.
We t.he undersigned citizens of Australia by this humble petition respectfully pray that the Australian Government introduce tax indexation on personal income tax scales and the tax free threshold.
Introduce:
(I) Broadly based wealth tax exempting small wealth holdings.

Special Prosecutors Bill

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1177

(2) Capital Gains tax exempting owner occupied homes. (3) The closing of tax loopholes which enable company
and high earner tax avoidance. (4) A resources tax or excess profit tax.
The Australian Government raise the single pensions and benefits to 30 per cent of average weekly earnings over the next three years.
The Australian Government institute wide controls over interest rates charged by all lending institutions and pass legislation which will allow for a fixed percentage of all available loan capital to be held in reserve for the purpose of owner occupied home loans.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrYoung.
Petition received.
GOVERNMENT BUSINESS
Precedence
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That, unless otherwise ordered, government business take precedence of general business on each day of sitting until the Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982-83, the Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1982-83 and the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill 1982-83 have passed all stages in the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (3.52)-The Opposition at all times is anxious to have as many matters as possible discussed but 1 notice that a precedent has been set that in the course of the Budget debate we do not proceed with general business, although 1 think we did break the rules recently to allow a discussion. 1 can appreciate the anxiety of all honourable members to participate in the Budget debate. 1 know that the grievance debate will be maintained, which 1 think is of some relevance to honourable members. Accordingly, we have no objection to this proposal.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
IMMIGRATION (UNAUTHORISED ARRIVALS) ACT
Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:
That, for the purposes of any Proclamation that may be made by the Governor-General before 30 September 1982 under section 31 of the Immigration (Unauthorised Arrivals) Act 1980, this House resolves that the date to be fixed as the date at the expiration of which that Act shall cease to be in force be 30 September 1983.
SPECIAL PROSECUTORS BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General) (3.53)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

The purpose of this Bill is to enable appointments to be made of Special Prosecutors with clear authority and independence to institute in exceptional cases and carryon necessary prosecutions. These cases will be of such a special character that the community should not be left in the slightest doubt that prosecutions will be handled with the highest professional competence with complete independence from any extraneous consideration. The first appointment of a Special Prosecutor will be of a person to assume overall responsibility for the handling of the prosecutions for the alleged taxation frauds referred to as bottom-of-the-harbour schemes and for coordinating the recovery by civil remedies under existing law of the amounts thereby lost to the Commonwealth. This legislation is therefore a clear indication of the Government's intention to proceed with the utmost vigour in these cases regardless of all considerations other than the proper enforcement of the law and the protection of the revenue.
The principal task of a Special Prosecutor will be in relation to breaches of laws of the Commonwealth or a Territory but he will be able to conduct prosecutions for offences against the laws of a State where he receives an appropriate appointment by or under the law of the relevant State. The Government is determined that the Special Prosecutor be backed and supported by all necessary staff including lawyers, accountants and investigating staff and special provision is made in clauses 17, 18 and 19 to ensure this result. The accountability of a Special Prosecutor is ensured by the requirement for annual reports of his operations. His independence is assured by the provisions of clause 7 limiting any direction or guidelines to directions or guidelines of a general character not relating to a particular case. Special Prosecutors appointed under the legislation will play an important role in the administration of criminal justice under Commonwealth law within the limits that will be imposed on them by the Attorney-General's delineation of their functions.
Debate (on motion by Mr Young) adjourned.
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILLS (Nos 1 to 9) 1982
Second Readings
Debate resumed from 17 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bills be now read a second time.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may 1 have your indulgence to suggest the House have a general debate covering these Bills and the Sales Tax

1178 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

(Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill 1982 as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (4.56)-The Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos I to 9) 1982 increase sales tax rates by 2t percentage points; that is, the three categories of sales tax rates are each increased by 2t percentage points. The lowest tax rate is increased from 5 per cent to 7t per cent; the intermediate rate, from 17t per cent to 20 per cent; and the top rate, from 30 per cent to 32t per cent. This is the second year in a row in which there have been significant increases in the rates of sales tax. Last year also sales tax rates increased by 2t percentage points, which means that the rate of tax on goods in the third Schedule, which incurs tax at the lowest rate, has gone up from 2t per cent to 7t per cent in the last two Budgets covering a period of just one year. A trebling of rates in a year certainly is a very substantial rate of increase.
Goods covered in the lowest tax schedule which has had this enormous rate of increase in the rate of tax are principally household furniture and appliances and other household goods. Goods taxable at the intermediate rate have had their tax rate increased by one-third in the last two Budgets; that is, from 15 per cent to 20 per cent in the space of one year. These goods include cars, commercial vehicles, boats, computers, confectionery, stationery, soft drinks, spirits, beer and imported wine. The goods taxable at the top rate have had their tax increased by almost one-fifth in the space of one year; that is, over the last two Budgets. They include such items as radios, televisions, cameras, jewellery, cosmetics and so on.
The Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill removes exemptions from a range of goods and imposes tax on them at 7t per cent. The goods not exempt, but which will now be taxed, include maps; hand tools, including gardening tools; motion picture films; household drapery and soft furnishings, including sheets and towels; servicing and construction equipment; cleaning cloths; and blankets. All those items were not previously subject to sales tax but are to be taxed at 7t per cent from I January next year. Some of those goods which are now to become taxable were included in the range of goods the Government sought to remove exemption from last year. The House will recall that in last year's

Budget an attempt was made to raise $330m in a full year by taxing a whole array of items which were previously not taxable. The Government has not sought to reintroduce such an attempt to tax all those items again this year, but some of those items have been included in the list of goods which are now to be made taxable. Of course, last year the Government dropped its attempts to spread that tax to the wide variety of goods which had previously been exempt. This year it has picked up a number of items at which it was looking last year, including soft furnishings, drapery, manchester and hand tools.
These Bills amount to yet another move by the Government towards the introduction of a broadly based tax on goods and services. Over the last few years the Government has taken various measures to try to achieve this objective. In 1978 it set up an inquiry into such taxes as a broad based tax on goods and services, which inquiry was soon abandoned following a major campaign by the Retail Traders Association. The Government set up another similar inquiry in 1980 following the 1980 election, which inquiry recommended an extended wholesale sales tax, which the Treasurer (Mr Howard) again rejected under political pressure by early 1981. In last year's Budget the Government extended the wholesale sales tax. The Treasurer denied that this was a move towards a more broadly based system and described it only as a small adjustment within the existing system.
Had all those intended changes in last year's Budget in respect of sales tax been passed the fullyear revenue effect would have been a 32.7 per cent increase over the previous year's collections. It would have been a very substantial rate of increase in sales tax revenues indeed-hardly one, I would have thought, which befits the description of adjustment within the existing system. As I have previously mentioned, the attempts to obtain that substantial increase failed principally because the extension of tax to items previously exempt was abandoned eventually by the Government.
Fin:' lly, of course, the Government has announced further extensions in this year's Budget equivalent to a 20.8 per cent increase over last year's collections. So we have that substantial increase in sales tax revenue this year. Many new goods have been brought into the sales tax system by the correction of so-called anomalies and the extensions to previously exempt goods in this year's Budget. This is little more than a gradual move to a broader-based tax by the back door, which we can expect to see more of in future

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1179

Budgets should this Government remain in office-which seems very doubtful.
These increases mean that sales tax collections have risen from 6+ per cent of total Commonwealth tax collections in 1980-81 to 8.7 per cent this year, which is a very substantial leap in just two years. This has happened because of the very substantial sales tax measures which were announced in last year's Budget and in this year's Budget. As I have said, all this indicates attempts by the Government to introduce a broad-based indirect tax system in this country-a substantial move towards indirect taxes and less reliance perhaps on income tax. The Government may talk of less reliance on income tax but there has not been much evidence of that until this year's Budget and even now the tax cuts are small indeed.
The Opposition is not in favour of these measures but will not seek to prevent their passage by the Parliament. However, we wish to give formal expression to our concern at these measures. I therefore move the following amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bills the House expresses its concern at the Government's actions in again increasing sales taxes, which increases will have adverse consequences in regard to inflation, the equity of the tax system, and living standards'.
Let me amplify our reasons for concern at the imposition of these tax increases. As the amendment moved at the second reading stage states, we are concerned about the inflationary impact of what the Government is doing. There is no doubt whatever that these measures add to the rate of inflation. The Treasurer admitted that. He said in this House in March 1981 that a $500m increase in indirect taxes represents a one per cent increase in the consumer price index. He admitted quite clearly that substantial moves towards reliance on indirect taxes increases the rate of inflation and pushes up the consumer price index at that rateone per cent for an increase of$500m. By virtue of the Bills now before us, the government is seeking to increase sales tax revenue this financial year by $414m and by $595m in a full year. The full year effect-the figure one should look at if one is concerned about prices-is over $500m. We can therefore say that the Treasurer, on the basis of his own calculations given to this House, is directly and indirectly adding something like one per cent or more to the consumer price index by increasing these sales tax rates and removing exemptions. That is clearly what he is doing.
This is a government which we are told fights inflation first, but last year and this year it sought

to increase sales taxes in a way which clearly adds to inflation. The Government is fighting inflation by increasing prices. That is a very curious process indeed. This increase of one per cent from the increase in sales taxes in this Budget is not the end of the story. Other increases in indirect taxes in this Budget will certainly mean that in total the increase in the consumer price index, which comes from this move to increase indirect taxes, will be over 2 per cent. The total increase in direct taxes from measures announced in this Budget will be $I,046m this year but in a full year it will be $I,445m. That $1,445m, it can be seen, will add something near to 3 per cent to the consumer price index, on the basis that $500m equals one percent.
This Budget is supposed to be concerned, as all previous Fraser Government Budgets were concerned, with fighting inflation, but it is quite clearly, on the face of the increases in revenue and the calculations given by the Treasurer, directly adding nearly 3 per cent to inflation by the increases in indirect taxes contained in it. That strikes us as quite an incredible process. Clearly it means a very significant boost to inflation. It is of course a major reason for spiralling unemployment. The rate of unemployment is now nearly 7 per cent. The Government admitted that in the very near future it will be over 8 per cent, and the Australian Financial Review claimed that by the end of this financial year it will be 10 per cent. Despite spiralling unemployment we still have a rate of inflation of the order of 11 per cent, on the Government's own calculations. Of course, a major reason why it is still of that order is that the Government is directly adding nearly 3 per cent to the rate of inflation by measures such as the one now before the House.
If the Government were concerned about getting the level of inflation down, one would think it would not add 3 per cent to the inflation rate by its own actions, but that is what it will do. By increasing these taxes it quite clearly not only directly increases the level of the CPI but also stimulates income claims by wage earners and others to make up for that increase in prices, and therefore adds indirectly to inflation. So we have quite a substantial inflationary impact stemming from such action. Both directly and indirectly there are inflationary impacts which in the end cause this very high level of inflation to continue despite massive unemployment. It strikes us as quite an incredible economic policy to pursue inflationary measures at a time when the Government continues to say that it is concerned to fight inflation. I must say that in the last year or two that rhetoric has tended to break down a little.

J J80 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September J982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

Last year's Budget raised indirect taxes almost wholly through sales tax rate increases by $449m in that financial year, and $596m in a full year. If we look at last year's Budget and this year's Budget we can say that in the space of a year-it is only just over a year ago since we discussed last year's Budget; indeed, we did so at this time last year-we had increases in indirect taxes of the order of $2 billion, or $2,041 m to be exact. Again, on the basis of the Treasurer's own calculations, that adds about 4 per cent to the inflation rate in the space of a year. That is the kind of inflationary impact that we see from the Government's own actions. It is indeed a very large influence on the inflation rate. If it were not occurring we could be pretty sure-in fact, we could be absolutely certain-that there would be a much lower inflation rate than at present.
I wish to make one other point in respect of the inflationary effect of sales tax increases, and that is that the increase in prices which occurs because of sales tax increases is not only the amount of the sales tax increase. This wholesale sales tax is placed on the last wholesale price, but between the wholesale price and the retail price there is a substantial mark up. The mark up includes the wholesale price which incorporates the amount of sales tax. When one increases the level of sales tax, with constant mark ups, there is an automatic increase in the price as a result of not only the increase in the sales tax but also the 50 per cent mark up or whatever it is. A 50 per cent mark up and a 2t per cent increase in the price of, say, a refrigerator as a result of this Budget means that the sales tax increase will also be marked up. The increase in the price of that refrigerator will be 3.75 per cent. With a 7t per cent tax applying to refrigerators, the actual increase in price caused by taxing refrigerators is not 7t per cent but II t per cent, assuming a 50 per cent retail mark up. That is something to bear in mind when we look at these increases. It is not just a 2t per cent increase in the price; it is a 2t per cent increase in the wholesale price which, with constant markups, means that the retail price will go up at a higher level than that. The Budget has accelerated the inflationary impact in that way.
Another factor which causes us concern about these measures is the regressive nature of indirect taxes. As I have shown in earlier debates, increases in indirect taxes bear most heavily on lower income groups. Increases in indirect taxes are likely to reduce the equity of the tax system. It certainly is true that various international studies have looked at indirect taxes in many countries to ascertain where they fall and who is most affected by them. Some have argued that where broad

based indirect taxes such as VAT-value added tax-apply the impact is near proportional, or at best proportional. I know of no one who argues that indirect taxes have a progressive effect in the way that income tax does if in fact the tax is not avoided by people on high incomes, as is certainly the case in this country at present. But certainly those international studies indicate that at best there is a proportional impact from indirect taxes and that most often the tax is regressive.
If that is the case in other countries we can certainly assume it to be the case here. Indeed, various studies have shown that that is the case here. I have alluded to those studies in previous debates in this House and I do not intend to refer to them now. We believe it is quite clear that the Australian indirect tax system is regressive. More reliance on that system means greater inequity in the tax system, or less equity, and that is a process which we deplore. In saying that I must take account of the fact that in this year's Budget the reductions in income tax that have been implemented-which cuts are in reality far less than the Government maintains after one takes account of the absence of tax indexation-are shaped in such a way that they do give greater benefits to lower income earners than to higher income earners, at least as regards the income tax scale. Items such as the mortgage interest tax deduction can be said to work in the opposite direction.
The countervailing increases in indirect taxes, much of which we are now discussing in the Bills before the House, will substantially, if not completely, offset the slight improvement in the equity of the tax system that comes from the revised income tax arrangements for this year. We do not see the tax system as having been improved in this Budget. Indeed, any benefits which have come from shaping the income tax cuts in a way which gives greater proportional benefits to people on lower incomes has been offset by the heavy additional increases in indirect taxes which are incorporated in the Budget.
Thirdly, dealing with the effect on living standards, the rise in sales taxes this year considerably reduces the improvement to living standards contained in other Budget measures. This financial year the average family will have its living standard reduced by $1.75 a week because of increased sales tax rates in the Budget. That figure comes from taking the total amount of revenue to be raised this year from sales tax increases and dividing that total by the number of Australian

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1181

households. We get about $1.75 a week in additional sales tax payments per Australian household this financial year. With other increases in indirect taxes there will be an impact of about $4.40 a week on the living standards of Australian households. That is, they will pay on average $4.40 a week more in indirect taxes this year than they did last year as a result of the increases in the tax rates and the abolition of some exemptions which are contained in the Budget. That increase in sales tax more than counteracts the benefits from this year's Budget for many families, indeed for most of them, as I pointed out in my speech on the Budget. I do not intend to go back over them.
Furthermore, the increases in indirect taxes in the last two Budgets, in association with the increase in the income tax burden that has occurred in those two Budgets taken together, have more than wiped out the benefits to living standards from other measures in this year's Budget for almost all households. We can say that over the last two years there has not been a reduction in income tax. Indeed, there has been an increase in the income tax burden for Australian households. There has also been a significant increase in the indirect tax burden on Australian households, and those increases in the direct and indirect tax burden quite clearly and markedly outweigh any benefits contained in this year's Budget by way of increased family allowances or other benefits. We see Australian family living standards as having been adversely affected by the increases in indirect taxes in last year's Budget and in this one.
There is a fourth area of concern about the measures now before the House. We cannot accept the Government's arguments for implementing these increases. The Government argues, for two reasons, that it is desirable to place greater reliance on indirect taxes and less on income tax than is currently the case. Firstly, the Government says that we raise an unduly high proportion of our total tax revenue from income tax and therefore we should move more to indirect taxes. Secondly, it says that greater reliance on indirect taxes would enable us to reduce our losses through tax avoidance and tax evasion. Those are the two key arguments which this Gov":', ,ment continually refers to as being reasons to move towards a broad based indirect tax system or more reliance on indirect taxes.
In regard to the first of those arguments, it is already the case that we raise a higher percentage of our taxes [[('IT' indirect taxes than do countries generally in llle Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. That is, on average we raise a higher proportion of our taxes from indirect taxes than do Western capit:.llist countries.

The latest year for which we have comparable statistics is 1979. In that year Australia raised 31.71 per cent of its taxes from indirect taxes and the OECD average was 29.35 per cent. So in 1979 we were quite notably above the OECD average for the proportion of our taxes which we raised through indirect taxes. Since 1979 we have had big increases in the crude oil levy, and in the last two Budgets we have had big increases in sales taxes and other indirect taxes. We can assume, I think rightly, that that differential between us and the OECD would have increased over the three years since 1979. We believe that the argument that we need to move more towards indirect taxes because we have an undue reliance on income tax simply ignores the fact that Australia already has a relatively high proportion of its taxes raised through indirect taxes. The Government will simply not confront that argument.
The second argument which the Government uses is that more reliance on indirect taxes will help to reduce tax avoidance and tax evasion. I should like to make two points about that. It is just a straight cop-out to say that we cannot overcome the tax avoidance problem, therefore we will move more towards indirect taxes and make sure that those who are currently avoiding tax at least pay some tax through higher sales taxes. That is the kind of argument that is being used and it is one which we believe is totally and completely unacceptable. The duty of this Government is to make sure that people do not avoid income tax. Of course, as we have known from what has been discussed in this House in the last couple of weeks, and indeed over the last few years, this Government has been hopeless in preventing massive tax avoidance and evasion. Having come to the point almost of despair at its total inability to close off tax avoidance and evasion, or unwillingness to do anything about it, the Government says: 'Let us move more towards indirect taxes because at least in that way we will ensure that when people spend their money on various goods they will pay some taxes'. We believe that that is a complete cop-out of the Governments responsibilities. It is duty bound to ensure that it does everything in its power to prevent tax avoidance and evasion. I do not want to canvass the arguments in that regard now, but it is patently not doing that. It should be doing that if it wants to overcome the problem of tax avoidance, not use this cop-out approach and saying: 'Let us move towards indirect taxes so that the tax avoiders have to pay something when they buy a refrigerator, a blanket or whatever'.
The second reaction we have to the Government's argument is that it is simply not the case

1182 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

that indirect taxes are avoidance proof or anywhere near it. It is not the case overseas; it is not the case here. A report entitled 'Value Added Tax-a Study of its Practical Aspects' by 1. D. Petty, a research paper for the Taxation Institute of Australian Research and Education Trust, is a study of indirect taxes overseas. It shows quite clearly that in country after country-the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, Denmark and Italy-there has been great trouble in preventing avoidance of value-added tax. Value-added tax is supposed to be the most secure, most selfenforcing, most avoidance proof of all the indirect taxes. Yet here we have a study which points to all sorts of problems that have been faced by governments overseas with the value-added tax. If one looks at the overseas experience one certainly cannot get any satisfaction about indirect taxes being avoidance proof, and therefore if we go more towards indirect taxes we will overcome the problems of tax avoidance. We simply will do that, on the basis of overseas experience. In regard to our own experience there is no reason to believe that that would be the case.
The Asprey Taxation Review Committee, which reported in 1975, indicated a variety of ways in which sales taxes could be easily avoided. Recent annual reports of the Commissioner of Taxation have indicated a considerable degree of detected avoidance and evasion of sales taxes. The latest annual report of the Taxation Commissioner says that 20,206 investigations were conducted during 1980-81 resulting in additional tax and penalties of $20.6m. This is some evidence of avoidance and evasion. Also, the annual reports of the Taxation Commissioner show that the number of legal proceedings for enforcement of sales tax increased by 214 per cent between 1975-76 and 1979-80. In a very short period indeed we had a very substantial increase in the number of legal proceedings in this area. So, we can see that evidence shows that there is great difficulty in preventing avoidance of sales tax and indirect taxes.
But there has been also a lot of evidence recently about various new schemes which have been introduced in regard to avoidance of sales taxes. These take various forms. One form this avoidance takes is through price splitting which is used predominantly in the cosmetic, soft drink and pet food industries. Essentially, the price of a good is split into a manufacturing cost and a service cost with the service cost being funnelled through a subsidiary company set up for the purpose. The price claimed as the price of the product is taxable but the service charge is not. Cadbury Schweppes Pty Ltd is one company which

has reportedly set up a service company in February of this year. It began double invoicing customers for, on the one hand, a service charge and, on the other hand, the cost of soft drinks. There have been various other evidences in the daily Press of this and other forms of schemes. As recently as yesterday there was an article in the Sydney Sun which was headlined 'Dealers In $250 mil Car Tax Fraud'. What this article does is to expose the way in which car dealers are paying very little sales tax indeed on new cars. As that becomes more widely known the competitors are forced to get into the business otherwise they are undercut in their pricing and lose the business. So, we are seeing a mushrooming of that scheme which the Sydney Sun says is in the order of $250m. There is, quite clearly a lot of evidence of avoidance of sales taxes. It is a nonsense to say that this is an avoidance proof tax and that a movement in this area will mean less tax avoidance.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Young-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (4.28)-It never ceases to amaze me, following as I often do the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), in speaking on economic subjects such as sales tax, the way he can pursue the figures to represent a case which I find extraordinarily difficult to believe. He suggested that Australia has a high level of indirect taxation compared with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. I just happen to have with me the statement that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) made on 12 March 1982. That statement shows clearly that the proportion of total tax revenue raised in Australia from general consumption taxes was 6.1 per cent. Out of 22 OECD countries we rank twenty-first. How on earth the honourable member can say then that we rank highly amongst the other OECD countries is absolutely beyond me. I suggest that the honourable member for Gellibrand refer to that speech and the tables 1 to 4 annexed to it which should clarify the matter for him.
This year's Budget increases both expenditure and receipts. Part of the increase in receipts is from the sales tax measures which are the subject of this debate. Before I discuss them in detail I will deal with some of the broader issues. Clearly, in a time of world and Australian economic recession the type of Budget a government brings down must have different goals from a Budget presented

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1183

in a relatively better economic climate. This Budget increases expenditure by 13.9 per cent and receipts by 11.3 per cent. That expenditure could well be increased further with the drought aid announcement made last week. That aid, of course, is meeting a specific need which has arisen in rural areas. Given the disastrous nature of the drought, its extent and its effects that aid was clearly called for, and I welcome the Government's initiative.
The point I make is that the increase in expenditure and the deficit is clearly aimed at stimulating the economy in this period of recession. I believe it is appropriate and defensible on those grounds. I say that because I am a strong believer in smaller government rather than larger government. I adhere to the view that we ought to be pressing to reduce the size of government. However, to adopt rigidly that line of argument while ignoring the recession and the appropriate remedy for our current economic ills would be unrealistically intransigent.
It will be well known that during the I930s recession governments generally undertook a great deal of belt-tightening which many believed aggravated the problems of that period. Having learned our lesson most economists agree that it is better now to try to mildly stimulate economic activities in times such as this, which, of course, is one of the objectives of this Budget. Australia is not only confronted with a world recession but also the recession comes at a time when, as a result of excessive wage demands, we have seriously disadvantaged ourselves because we have lost a great deal of our competitive advantage on world markets. It is, therefore, essential that our wages structure be brought into line with the rest of the world. This Budget provides enormous assistance through reductions in taxation and an increase in benefits to all Australians. The benefits especially for the average family are worth around $20 a week. Even if we deduct the cost of the increases on sales taxes imposed by these Bills it is well recognised that the average family will still be around $17 a week better off.
The Government has taken the initiative to increase take-home pay. That initiative must be taken into consideration when wage increases are being sought. It is in this context that I repeat: Our wage structure must be brought into line with the rest of the world. I am, therefore, disgusted when I see that, despite the Government's action and despite the high level of unemployment in Australia, the Australian Council of Trade Unions appears to remain intent on entrenching excessive levels of wages growth. I quote the Acting Minister for Employment and Industrial

Relations, the present Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), who said on 3 September:
The ACTU's wages strategy, if put into effect, would mean a substantial further increase in real earnings over 1982-83, a further squeeze on profits and a marked deterioration in employment.
He went on:
This strategy involves a specific campaign of industrial action in sensitive industries in order to force employers to concede. The unions seem unwilling to bring their claims to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission where they can be examined on their merits with regard to the public interest, free of disruptive industrial action.
If Australia is to progress out of this recession there must be co-operation from the unions, otherwise there will be higher unemployment and lower standards of living.
I turn now to the details of these Bills. The Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos I to 9) impose an increase on the various rates of sales tax of 2t percentage. In other words, the respective rates will increase from 5 per cent to 7t per cent, from 17t per cent to 20 per cent and from 30 per cent to 32t per cent. The result is an increase in revenue this year of $370m and, in a full year, an increase of $490m. The Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill imposes sales taxes of 7t per cent on a range of goods that were previously exempt. Those goods range from mats, hand tools and to equipment used in the course of servicing, repair or construction. It does not include goods which become part of the goods being repaired or the structure being built. The Bill will increase revenue by $44m this year and $105m in a full year. The total estimated revenue from these changes this year will be $414m.
Mr Robert Brown-Ripping off the poor.
Mr PORTER-In a full year this will amount to $595m. It is interesting to hear the interjection: 'Ripping off the poor'. I believe we ought to compare those increases with the expected cost to government revenue of some of the income tax reductions which are initiated in this Budget. Honourable members will see from the figures that the interjection is totally false. The Opposition seems blind to the real economic effects of this Budget. There are changes in the income tax rates scale and I will outline them: There is a reduction in the standard rate of tax from 32c down to 30c in the dollar; there is an increase in the tax free threshold from $4,195 to $4,595; and the standard rate step of tax will rise from $17,894 to $19,500. The cost for this year will be $1,468m. Let us compare that with the $414m increase in revenue from the sales tax measures, the subject of these Bills. It is quite clear that the thrust of the

1184 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

Budget is to increase take home pay. The interjections are totally false. The full year cost of the income tax reductions is $2,357m. Compare that with $595m, the full year cost of the sales tax measures, the subject of these Bills. There is no doubt that those figures support the view that families will be better off as a result of this Budget.
However, there is a further and important matter to be considered when discussing these Bills. They are a step in the right direction in correcting an imbalance in our reliance on income tax as a source of revenue. I will refer to the table which I referred to earlier in this debate, which is an annexure to the Treasurer's statement last year. One can see that 20 years ago, in 1962-63, the proportion of the Commonwealth Government's revenue raised from personal income tax was around 37 per cent. This year it is around 55 per cent. In other words, over the last 20 years there has been a steady growth in the proportion of revenue coming from income tax. I believe it is imperative to redress this situation because high levels of income tax are a disincentive for individuals. It is a disincentive to invest and a disincentive for individuals to increase their work effort or to do overtime. These are fundamental reasons why there are obvious advantages in changing the mix of direct and indirect taxation. Clearly, if we are to shift our emphasis of revenue raising away from direct taxation it will increase the prospect of further substantial and desirable reductions in direct tax, particularly personal income tax.
These Bills are effective in reducing the amount that would otherwise have to be raised by income tax not only by increasing sales tax on some items that are already taxed but also by broadening the base of goods which are to be subject to sales tax. In fact, this year, the proportion of revenue raised by income tax will remain high even though there is an increase in sales tax. This year it is estimated that personal income tax will raise 55.8 per cent of the Commonwealth Budget's taxation revenues. Company tax will raise 12.6 per cent. It is worth looking at that figure because last year the proportion of the Budget raised from company tax was 13.9 per cent. The year before it was 15 per cent. Why the proportion of company tax has dropped is pretty clear. The rate of profitability of our companies in Australia has fallen because there has been an unbelievable wage push in Australia.
The proportion of revenue raised from customs, excise and sales tax will increase this year from 20.8 per cent to 22.2 per cent of total taxation revenues. The proportion of revenue arising from the crude oil levy will fall from 8.4 per cent last year to 7.4 per cent this year. So overall the

proportion of revenue arising from personal income tax will fall by less than one per cent. One reason is that the amounts raised from company tax and the crude oil levy will fall. The proportion of tax arising from the customs, excise and sales tax measures will increase and the proportion arising from personal income tax will remain about the same. However, I reiterate that, given economic recovery and increased company profitability, there is the prospect that revenue from company tax will rise and further reductions in personal tax could be a prospect.
I want to mention briefly two other points. If we continue to shift the burden from direct tax to indirect tax this will mean that those who buy goods for resale, which are subject to the tax, will have to find larger amounts of money to fund the purchases of those goods for the period they remain unsold. At the moment sales tax is payable 21 days after the month in which the goods were purchased by the person intending to resell them. Therefore, if we are to continue to go down the track of moving from direct to indirect taxation the Government will have to give consideration to the time which is given to pay these taxes. At the moment 21 days is allowed. It may well be that to ease the burden on the cash flow, particularly that of small businesses, that period ought to be reviewed to see if more time to pay should be given in the future.
The other matter I want to raise is the confusion which inevitably follows the announcements on Budget night of increases in sales tax. There was an example again this year of consumers going into shops and small businessmen not knowing whether to impose the new sales tax. There is a clear distinction between excise and sales tax. Some excises are imposed from the night of the Budget, but sales taxes are imposed on goods which are subsequently bought by the retailer. It is, therefore, not correct for the retailer to impose those sales taxes unless they are in respect of goods which are bought by the retailer following the Budget.
I believe the Commissioner of Taxation ought to make available an explanation of the difference between the excise and sales tax increases which inevitably occur in budgets. If such an explanation is readily available to small businessmen I think it would be of benefit to them and when changes occur after a Budget they would know whether they had to increase the prices of their goods. That will avoid the problem which arose in Adelaide this year when some businessmen put up the price because they did not know. Customers were aggrieved-reasonably and fairly so-by that. They took the matter up, I understand, with

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1185

the office of consumer affairs in South Australia. If the Commissioner of Taxation could make the above mentioned information available I think it would assist the small businessman. I conclude by wholeheartedly supporting these Bills as part of what I believe is a very welcome Government Budget.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (4.46)-Let me first of all disillusion the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) concerning the proportion of total taxation in Australia which is raised by way of indirect taxes. I am perfectly aware of the fact that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has quite deliberately misrepresented the position in order to justify the switch that has taken place towards indirect taxes. To have the honourable member for Barker compound that mistake, that deliberate misrepresentation, by not bothering to check the figures makes the situation even worse. I say quite emphatically that Australia does not raise a relatively small proportion of total taxation by way of indirect taxes. In fact, the situation in Australia is quite to the contrary.
The most recent figure available from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development concerning the proportion of total taxation raised by way of indirect taxes in Australia is 31.7 per cent. That is the figure given by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) in his contribution to this debate. The figure that has been given by the Treasurer before and which was repeated by the honourable member for Barker relates only to sales tax. Of course, it is very convenient for the Treasurer or for any other honourable member on the Government side simply to-
Mr Porter-Compare like with like.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-That is the position. The Treasurer was referring only to sales tax. He knows it. For the honourable member for Barker not to make the effort to go and check those figures in the first place to confirm that the Treasurer is not only misleading us but quite obviously also is misleading honourable members who sit behind him is a disgraceful situation. This is particularly so because these figures have been used to justify the transfer of the tax burden away from the high income earners, who should pay more under the progressive direct tax scale-who can and should pay more-to those people who should not be expected to carry the burden. The changes that have been introduced by this Government, particularly the changes over the last two years, have been based on that sort of deliberate fallacy on its part. It is about time it was put to rest.

Both the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9) and the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill represent a continuing assault by this Government on the living costs and living standards of Australian families. The Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9) have the effect of increasing by 2+ percentage points all those increased rates which applied from last year anyway and the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill 1982 has the effect of bringing into the sales tax net a number of goods that had previously escaped it. There is no question that the Government is quite determined to continue this assault. It was thwarted last year in the miserable attempt that it made to inflict a 2t per cent sales tax on what were classified as the necessities of life, for example, kids' clothing and shoes, building materials for people's homes, and books and newspapers. Fortunately that was rejected by the Senate and the Government has not had the gall to reintroduce it-at least not on this occasion.
This whole Budget package was introduced in the context of an early election. If that election takes place there will be a reversal in approach and the Government will introduce all these fiscal measures next year. The Government knows that, we know it and the Australian community knows it as well. Despite all the Government's rhetoric about adjusting the tax mix, the fact remains that indirect taxes are regressive, unjust, inequitable and create a much more severe burden on lower income earners. The approach that this Government has taken to this question throws into very serious doubt any suggestion that this Government might be humane or might have any compassionate feelings for those people in the community whom it continues to burden.
The repeated claim by both the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer in relation to indirect taxes is that there is some need to adjust the tax mix, to place more emphasis on indirect taxes, to provide scope for a reduction in personal income tax. In fact what is their real objective? I think this was indicated very clearly in a radio interview with the Prime Minister in Perth in December last year. He said:
Also I think the best way to spread the burden a bit is to have a broader-based indirect tax--
I emphasise the next group of words:
. . . because that does raise quite a lot of money.
Indeed it does. It is raised from people who should not be expected to make the contribution of that big amount of money. I will quote from the editorial of the Newcastle Herald of 1 September last year relating to the consideration given to

1186 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

sales tax intentions at that time. The following are not my words but are from a responsible, reputable and highly respected major provincial newspaper in Australia. The editorial stated:
Nothing the Government says on taxation can be accepted with anything but scepticism.
What the article went on to state is in marked contrast with the sort of nonsense we get from honourable members on the Government side, including the Treasurer, who should be here when the Budget is being considered rather than flying around the world. He should be here not only to answer the charges about the Costigan and McCabe-Lafranchi reports but also to defend his Budget. The Newcastle Herald continued:
The regrettable aspect of the political juggling is that sales tax is here to stay.
The editorial further stated:
It is a vicious tax, and in some respects even an undemocraticone.
Of course it is. There is no way in which the Opposition will support the continuous shift towards indirect taxes. Of course, the Treasurer repeated the claim when introducing these amendment Bills this year. He said:
I drew attention last year to the clear advantage that lies in effecting some change in the mix of direct and indirect taxes.
He further stated:
I again emphasise the potential that such a change gener~ ates for desirable reductions in direct taxes, particularly personal income tax.
Of course, the Government was taking advantage of the situation before what it thought was going to be a snap election to introduce these measures. The more obvious measures appear to have some sort of concessional arrangement built into them. Obviously the Treasurer has learnt the way in which it is possible to finance tax cuts that he was wondering about in April this year. He said: 'Tax cuts are not feasible. Where are we going to find the money?' He has discovered the solution: To provide tax cuts with the one hand you must drag the money back with the other. Of course, that is what these sales tax increases are intended to do.
The Sales Tax Amendment Bills are designed to impose a sales tax of 7.5 per cent in a range of goods that are now exempt from the sales tax under the First Schedule. Let us look at some of the things that will impact on households. There will be a 7t per cent sales tax on cleaning and polishing cloths, cleaning sponges, handkerchiefs, blankets, braid, ribbon and tape, household drapery and soft furnishings. Some of the goods taxed that will have an impact on industry are contained in the first list but as well as those are hand tools, engine cleaning cotton waste, and servicing and

construction equipment. Of course, last year the Government wanted to impose a 2-1: per cent tax on building materials but it was not allowed to get away with it. This year the Government has decided to compensate in some way-it still wants to make sure that the home builders are ripped off-by building into the cost of home construction in Australia a 7t per cent sales tax on equipment used to build homes. That particular provision is to give a net result to revenue this year of $44m and $105m over a full year.
The next provision is even more interesting and fascinating. Let us look at some of the provisions of the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9) for this year. First of all, the 5 per cent sales tax rate will be increased to 7.5 per cent. I do not think we should allow the claim to continue to be made that the increase is 2.5 per cent. In fact, it is not; it is an increase of 2.5 percentage points and the increase in the sales tax is 50 per cent. In two years the sales tax paid on those items included in the Third Schedule has increased by 200 per cent. The increase in sales tax on items in the Fourth and Fifth Schedules and those goods that were not covered by any Schedules has been from I7.5 per cent to 20 per cent. It was suggested again that that is an increase of 2.5 per cent. In fact, the increase is 14.3 per cent and it should be recognised as such. The sales tax levied on items in the Second Schedule has increased from 30 per cent to 32.5 per cent. Again, it has been suggested that the increase is 2.5 per cent. It is nothing of the kind; it is 8.3 per cent.
Let us look at the fascinating contrast between the 8.3 per cent increase in sales tax and the other increases. The percentage increase of 8.3 per cent will apply to things such as jewellery and furs, gold plated wear, perfumery and bath salts. I will now tell honourable members some of the things on which sales tax will increase by 14.3 per cent. They do not include the bath salts of the wealthy but the soap of the lower and middle income earners, kids' bicycles, soap powders, disinfectants, soft drinks, toilet paper and kids' toys. The percentage increase in sales tax on those items is 14.3 per cent but the percentage increase on the bath salts of the wealthy, the gold plated wear, the perfumery and the jewellery and furs of the wealthy is 8.3 per cent. The increase of 50 per cent goes on refrigerators, washing machines and a range of household goods. So the people who are struggling to get their homes together will pay an increase in sales tax of 50 per cent. What a miserable approach. Is there anyone on the Government side who can reasonably defend such a proposition? The increases will give a net result this

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1187

year of $370m and the rip-off over a full year will be another $490m.
Let me give the total increases in this Government's Budget from indirect taxes. The increase in the existing rate of 2.S percentage points, not 2.S per cent, will yield $490m in a full year. The application of sales tax at a rate of 7.S per cent to goods in the First Schedule will yield $10Sm a year. The excise on distillate for off-road use will yield $176m a year. The increased excise on beer will yield $13Sm a year. The increased excise on cigarettes and tobacco will yield $12Sm a year. The total increase will be $1,031m a year. We can add to that the commensurate increases on Customs and excise duty, the tax on bank transactions and other indirect taxes yielding $200m in a full year. We can add the increase that is expected on the excise duty on oil and liquified petroleum gas this year which will be another $220m. So the increases continue.
I will finish on this point: In 1975-76 the proportion of total taxation which was provided by indirect taxes was 28 per cent. That was at the end of the period of the last Labor Government. That Government had been able to reduce the proportion because it did not believe that indirect taxes should be raising the revenue. Now the proportion is back up to 30 per cent. There is no question that if the Australian people want equity built into the tax system and the way in which the Australian community is managed there is only one party in Australia that is determined to and capable of building equity into the system and that is the Australian Labor Party. The Australian people will have the opportunity to establish that change very shortly.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (S.O)-The Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos I to 9) which are before the House propose to provide for an overall increase in sales taxes of 2.S percentage points on all the items contained within the Schedules applicable to those Acts. The Bills also impose sales tax of 7.S per cent on a range of goods that are now exempt from any sales tax. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has advised the House that the overall increases will provide revenue of $370m this financial year and $490m in a full year. Such increases were applicable from 18 August. We are told that the new sales tax of 7.S per cent applicable from I January 1983 will provide revenue of $44m this year and $lOSm in a full year.
The total revenue from sales tax in 1982-83 is estimated by the Treasury to be $3,629m, an increase of 27.1 per cent over last year. When one considers that the increases last year were 3S.8 per cent over those collected in 1980-81, the amount

of revenue now being collected by the Government shows up starkly as being a particularly heavy burden on the Australian community. The total revenue increase in sales tax since 1980-81 has been $1,S27m or 72.6 per cent. In cold hard terms the increases in sales taxes over the last two years mean that a family of four is paying an additional $7 per week on the acquisition of goods and services. If the excise increases on fuel are included the rise in indirect taxes over the two year period amounts to $8.40 per week.
In February this year, when debating the Government's Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos lA to 9A) 1981 [No.2], I predicted that by next year the Government would be extending the sales tax provisions to incorporate the taxing of food and services in accordance with the suggestions made by the Treasury in its 1974 Taxation Paper No. S dealing with Commonwealth taxation of goods and services. My prediction, which was vehemently denied by Government members at that time, although not yet completely fulfilled, has been partially vindicated. The new sales tax of 7.S per cent to be applied to a range of goods and services bites further into the area which has never been subject to taxes before. On 17 September 1981 I had incorporated in Hansard appendices D and E of Treasury Taxation Paper No. S of 1974. I seek leave again to have those appendices incorporated in Hansard because they are relevant to the present legislation.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Treasury Taxation Paper No.5 October 1974 'Commonwealth Taxation of Goods or Services'
AppeodixD
ESTIMATED REVENUE YIELD FROM EXTENSION OF WHOLESALE SALES TAX
The table below shows estimates for the financial year 1971-72 of the possible revenue yield if those goods which, over the years, have been exempted from sales tax were brought back within the coverage of the wholesale tax at, for example, the 2t per cent rate.

Item
Cider and fruit juices Books, magazines, newspapers, etc. Wrapping and packaging materials Hand tools Motion picture films Saddlery and harness Oils, greases Prams, pushers, etc. Insecticides
Sub-total

1971-72
2t percent
$m 0.4 7.0 0.3 2.0 0.05 0.03 0.7 0.1 0.5
11.1

1188 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

1971-72

Item

2+ percent

Foodstuffs . . . . . . . . . Clothing, footwear, piecegoods, drapery

$m 77.5 36.5

Sub-total
Earthmoving equipment Ships and ships' equipment Aircraft and aircraft equipment Private omnibuses Fuels Building materials

114.0
2.5 0.9 0.7 0.05 13.0 31.0

Total

173.2

This table is presented in such a way as to show the expected yield from goods that might fairly be brought within the coverage of the tax, more essential goods that would be more difficult to bring back within the coverage of the tax, and finally those items of expenditure which fall at least in part outside the definition of consumption expenditure and which would involve to some extent the taxation of producer goods. It can be seen that the first category of goods, the taxation of which might encounter less opposition than the s'!cond category, would provide only limited additional revenue.
AppeodixE
ESTIMATED REVENUE YIELD: SELECTED SERVICES

1971-72

2+ per 5 per 10per 15 per

Item

cent cent cent cent

$m $m $m $m

Admissions

2.2 4.5 9.0 13.5

Meals in cafes, restaurants,

etc.

4.0 8.0 16.0 24.0

Meals and accommodation in

hotels

2.6 5.2 10.5 15.7

Hairdressing

2.6 5.1 10.2 15.3

Laundry, dry cleaning, etc.

2.7 5.3 10.6 16.0

Repairs:

Motor vehicles

6.2 12.5 25.0 37.5

Other

1.2 2.5 5.0 7.5

Hiring services

1.0 2.0 4.0 6.0

Travel:

Fares (excl. government)

11.5 23.0 46.0 69.0

Personal freight

0.2 0.3 0.6 0.9

Total(a)

34.2 68.4 136.9 205.4

Betting: Licensed bookmakers(b) Totalisators(b)

21.9 43.8 87.6 131.4 20.2 40.4 80.8 121.2

Total(a)

42.1 84.2 168.4 252.6

(a) Totals do not add due to rounding. (b) Already subjected to State taxation. Estimates assume that turnover would not fall off-3 highly dubious assumption in these particular cases. The revenue estimates are thus unrealistic.
The table shows estimates on the basis of four different assumed rates of tax. If services were included within the scope of a retail sales or value added lax it would be desirable in the interests of administrative simplicity for the rate on services to be the same as that on goods. A separate tax on services in conjunction with the existing wholesale sales tax. would not necessarily result

in administrative advantages if imposed at the same rate as the tax. on goods. It is not necessary, therefore, to think in terms of rates equivalent to the wholesale sales tax.. It can be seen, however, that quite high rates of tax would be necessary jf substantial amounts of revenue were to be raised by taxing services.
Mr MOUNTFORD-I thank the House. From an examination of these tables it is easy to see how the Government is gradually taxing by stealth those goods and services which were previously exempt. In the 1981 Budget, tax was applied to many of the goods shown in appendix D. Those items which escaped the tax in 1981 have now in the main been caught by the present legislation. The major item still not gripped for sales tax is foodstuffs. Turning now to appendix E, we see that for the first time the Government is going into the services area to collect sales tax. It is hitting the repairs section which, incidentally, will yield the second highest return after travel costs on which sales taxes will now be levied. I would think that after the Government's reversal on previous promises made on the imposition of indirect taxes I am on fairly safe ground still by saying that within 12 months this Government intends imposing sales tax on foodstuffs and the remainder of the goods and services outlined in appendices D and E. Government members can deny those remarks all they wish but the actions of this Government to date in this area have proved otherwise.
The Treasurer in his Budget Speech to the House this year and last year said that the Government is seeking to move gradually away from a reliance on personal tax as a source of revenue to a widening of the indirect tax base. 1 should like to outline some of the goods and services which will now be subject to the imposition of sales tax for the first time and others which will be subject to the overall increase of 2.5 percentage points. My reason for outlining some of the items is to show how the disposable incomes of the Australian community will be affected under these measures. The Treasurer, in his Budget Speech, dismissed the increases in two and a half lines when he said:
This broadening of the sales tax base is to include goods such as hand tools, construction equipment and manchester. It does not include what some have regarded as the 'necessities of life'.
The legislation now under debate provides for a 7.5 per cent sales tax to be imposed on goods and services which until now had not been subject to any tax. I have not time in this debate to go through all the matters, but if we look through the schedules, excluding the items now to be gripped by this tax, we see quite a number of household items listed: Household drapery and soft furnishings, namely, bedsheets, bedspreads, curtains and textile cords, loose furniture covers, pillowcases, quilts, tablecloths, table covers, table mats, table

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1189

napkins, table runners and doilies, tea-towels, towels, face cloths and face washers, blankets, travelling rugs and handkerchiefs made of cloth. One could go on and on, but time does not permit. Goods now being taxed at 32.5 per cent compared with 30 per cent last year include radio and television receivers, record players, cameras, video recorders, watches, jewellery, et cetera. Tax on these goods will raise $565m this financial year, an increase of 18 per cent over last year. As my colleague the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) pointed out a few minutes ago, these items are bought by people who can well afford them and who are not being subject to the same percentage increases as those on the lower scale.
Goods now being taxed at 20 per cent compared with 17.5 per cent last year include motor cars and commercial vehicles, boats, confectionery, stationery, computers, soft drinks, et cetera. Tax on these goods will raise $2,764m this year, an increase of 24.6 per cent over last year. Goods now subject to a tax of 7.5 per cent compared with 5 per cent last year include household furniture, appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines and other household goods. Tax on these goods will raise $300m this year, an increase
of 92.3 per cent over last year. So we can see where the burden is falling. As I mentioned previously, the total sales tax collections this year of $3,629m are an increase of 27.1 per cent over last year and represent an extra payout of $3 per week for the average family man with a wife and two children. The present increases in sales tax are completely reprehensible as they hit hardest those on lower incomes. The statement by the Treasurer that the goods being taxed do not include necessities of life is not a feasible one. Would anyone really suggest that household furniture, refrigerators, stoves, mattresses, blankets, bedsheets, towels and tablecloths, to name a few items, are not necessities of life? If the Treasurer does not consider such items as necessities of life, he and other Government members are suggesting a very low standard of living for the Australian community. Of course these and many other goods being taxed are necessities of life and as

such should be free of any tax. Irrespective of a family's income, these goods are a necessity in the home. To back up my statement that indirect taxes fall heaviest on those on lower incomes, I refer the House to a number of studies carried out in this area. The first study I refer to was carried out by the Committee for Economic Development of Australia and is titled 'The Reform of the Commonwealth Government Sales Tax' and is dated August 1982. On page 10 of that report, under the heading 'Equity', it states:
In assessing the equity of a tax it is useful to distinguish between horizontal and vertical equity. To satisfy horizontal equity, a tax should impose the same burdens on individuals having an equal capacity to pay tax. Vertical equity requires that individuals with unequal capacity to pay be treated differently and in accordance with that inequality.
Vertical equity considerations suggest that a tax should be proportional or progressive with respect to income. Hence there is concern about the regressive nature of a broad-based indirect tax. Although essentially proportional in terms of consumption expenditure, the tax is regressive as related to income. This is because the proportion of income spent on consumption goods declines with movement up the income scale. The question then' arises as to whether any regressivity introduced by the proposed changes should be compensated by income tax or social welfare adjustment.
It is obvious that the tax cuts afforded the community offer only an indexation catch-up and in no way compensate for the massive increases in indirect taxes. The next study I refer to is the 1975 report of the Taxation Review Committee, under the chairmanship of Mr Justice Asprey. It showed quite clearly that taxation is very sharply regressive at the lower end of the household income scale, nearly proportional in a wide middle band, and progressive only at higher levels. The reason given was that indirect taxes are chiefly responsible for this occurrence. The Committee prepared a table showing taxes as a proportion of income for the year 1966-67 and, although the income levels are now largely outdated, I seek leave to have this table incorporated in Hansard because I believe it shows how indirect taxes fall heaviest on lower income earners.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

1190 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

Table4.B TAXES AS A PROPORTION OF INCOME. 1966-67

Income range(a)

Australian Government taxes

Personal Company

income income

tax

tax

Estate and gift
duties

Indirect taxes

Total

State govern-
ment taxes

Local govern-
ment taxes

Total taxes

$ per annum 01,449
1,4502,899
2,9004,349 4,3505,799
5,8007,249 7,2508,699 8,700-10,149
10,150-13,049
13,050-17,399 17,400+

percent
2.9 7.8 9.4 10.3 11.1 11.9 13.2 15.8 17.0

per cent
11.5 7.2 3.4 1.9
2.9 2.5 J.7 3.1 9.5
13.3

percent
0.9 3.3

per cent 18.9 13.0
11.6 9.9
9.0 8.6 7.5
7.4
8.0 6.8

percent
30.4 23.1
22.7 21.2
22.1 22.2
21.1 23.7
34.2 40.4

per cent 5.6 4.1
3.8 3.3
3.0 2.9 3.0
3.3
5.4 7.0

percent 4.9
2.8
2.1 J.7 1.5
1.4 1.2
1.2 1.3 1.0

percent 40.9
30.0 28.6 26.3
26.7
26.5 25.3 28.2
40.9 48.4

(a) Adjusted by consumer price index to equivalent purchasing power in December quarter 1973. Source: Based on Macquarie survey.

It can be seen from this table how the burden of indirect taxes falls three times harder on those on lower incomes. I am sure that an updating of the income levels to current levels would show similar percentages for indirect taxes, particularly taking into account the massive 72.6 per cent increase in revenue in this area over the last two years. One could go on referring to other studies, including the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development study 'on the impact of consumption taxes, which showed at page 18 that consumption taxes as a percentage of disposable income were regressive in nature.
It is the people on low incomes who are continually being asked by the Fraser Government to bear the greatest burdens. It was these people who fared worst in the Budget. They got the lowest percentage tax relief and they will also go to the end of the line for low-cost government housing. When deciding which items are to be subject to sales tax, the Government has thrown equity to the winds. The burden has again fallen on those with the weakest voice in the community. The Government's philosophical ideals were quickly abandoned when its powerful friends in the news media campaigned against sales tax on printed material earlier this year. I support the amendment moved by my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis).
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bills read a second time.
Third Readings
Leave granted for third readings to be moved forthwith.

Bills (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
SALES TAX (EXEMPTIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS) AMENDMENT
BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 17 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison~Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (5.15)~1 move:
Page 2, Schedule, after clause I insert the following clause:
"IA. Item 107A in the First Schedule is amended by omitting from paragraph (I) (c) 'item 107' and substituting 'item 6 in the Third Schedule'. ".
This amendment to the Bill is necessary as a result of motion picture films becoming taxable. Item 107 in the First Schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act which exempts motion picture films is to be omitted and will be inserted in the same form as item 6 in the Third Schedule. Goods covered by the Third Schedule are to be taxable at 7.5 per cent.
Item 107A, First Schedule, provides exemption for certain goods for use for business or industrial purposes in the production of motion picture films. It is to remain in the First Schedule but paragraph 1 (c) of that item refers to apparatus

Sales Tax Amendment Bill

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1191

and materials for use in developing, editing or otherwise processing goods to which sub-item (2) of item 107 applies. With the omission of item 107 from the First Schedule the reference in paragraph I (c) of item 107A to item 107 (2) is of no effect.
To ensure that the exemption provided in paragraph I (c) of item 107Aoperates as intended, it is necessary to alter the reference in that item to refer to sub-item (2) of item 6 in the Third Schedule. This consequential drafting amendment was overlooked in drafting the original Bill. The amendment to the Bill will correct the position.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (5.l7)-This amendment is of a purely technical nature and as such the Opposition does not oppose it although in listening to the speech of the Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) it was hard to discern precisely what it is about. The package of sales tax Bills that we have dealt with and and the sales tax amendment that we are dealing with now indicate in the general sense the Government's increasing reliance on the use of sales taxes as and indirect taxes as a way of raising revenue. We have seen in this Budget that the Government is to raise approximately $1,500m extra in revenue from indirect taxes. We have seen the burden of taxation in this country moved from those people who can afford it to those who cannot afford it. Indirect taxes affect everybody equally. They affect people on high salaries at the same rate as they affect people on low salaries, people who have no income and pensioners.
As the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford) said earlier, the present Government's increases in sales taxes and indirect taxes will cost a family of four in Australia approximately $7 a week extra to live. That to my mind represents a very unfair shift of the burden of taxation in this country. In fact in this Budget we have seen a quite significant increase in other forms of tax for ordinary income earners. Pay-asyou-earn taxes as a proportion of total tax collections have increased from 43.5 per cent in 1981-82 to 45.4 per cent in 1981-82. In the same period we have seen company taxes decline from 14.2 per cent of total tax collections to 11.9 per cent. When we couple that increase in net PAYE taxation with the sales taxes and indirect taxes that have been levied by this Government it is quite plain that the Government is embarking on a deliberate approach of making low income earners and ordinary wage earners pay the cost of its economic program. We have seen the Government put forward the somewhat phoney Bicentennial Road Development Program and a levy

on petrol to ensure that that Program will be paid for. Once again, that will flow through to the cost of goods and services for ordinary Australians. That is the sort of revenue that should be raised by methods other than a tax on petrol.
Whilst the Labor Government when it was in office reduced the reliance on indirect taxation the coalition presently in office has reversed that trend and, in line with the stated preferences of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), has moved towards a heavier burden of indirect taxes, due mainly to the rapid growth of taxes such as the oil levy, which I have just mentioned, and sales taxes. The Government has attacked even such areas as sport. It is interesting to note that the Government's increase of 2+ percentage points in the sales tax on sporting goods, from IS per cent to 17+ per cent, will provide it with a revenue in the next financial year of approximately $90m. Of course, one has to contrast that with the $3.7m that the Government provides to assist sporting bodies. On the one hand the Government takes $90m away from people through the sales tax on sporting goods and on the other hand it gives a paltry $3.7m in grants to sporting organisations.
We have also seen in the perversion of the taxation system under this Government a terrible crime perpetrated on pensioners. The Government seems to have missed the fact that many pensioners are still paying mortgages. While one can applaud the Government's proposal to provide some relief to people who are paying off their homes by giving a tax rebate, one can only look in dismay at the fact that the rebate does not apply to pensioners or other people on low incomes who do not pay tax because unfortunately they do not earn a taxable income. I think when these things are taken into account the moving of the tax system to rely on these broad-based consumeroriented taxes rather than on taxes on dividends and on high salaries is to be deplored. I feel that the Government should look again at this method of raising revenue. I think it should look again at the proposals in this Budget which ensure that those people who are on low incomes or very moderate incomes are penalised once again. The Budget's tax cuts and other tax measures are great for those people who have money. For those who do not have much money they are dismal.
The proposals with regard to sales taxes and other such indirect taxes that we have been discussing today in this Parliament place more and more pressure on low income families in Australia who are going to the wall every day. To raise $1,500m through the type of tax proposed in this

1192 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

Budget is appalling in my view. Something should be done.
Mr Robert Brown-It is absolutely shameful.
Mr LEO McLEAY-As the honourable member for Hunter has just said, it is absolutely shameful. It points out the way in which this Government has decided to crush the ordinary working people of Australia while it allows its cronies to get away with blue murder. It is rather interesting to note that it has been said that tax avoidance in this country is running at about $1,500m. What we are really seeing is this Government recouping the money that is being thieved by corporate crooks from the Government, from ordinary families, ordinary people and ordinary salary earners. It is one of the greatest disgraces that this country has seen in many years.
Amendment agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with an amendment; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman)-by leaveread a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 7 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (5.26)-1 never cease to be amazed at the double talk that one hears in this Budget debate from one Opposition speaker after another. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) seeks to convince the Australian people that he and the Australian Labor Party alone have the economic recipe that will solve all our economic problems, reduce inflation, restore profits, create jobs, inspire confidence and get our economy back on the right road. But how could one forget Labor's disastrous economic management when it was in government? In 1972, when the Labor Party was elected to office, the inflation rate was 4.5 per cent. Three years later it had risen to 17 per cent. The unemployment level in this country was 2.6 per cent when it was elected and three years later it had nearly doubled.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr HUNT-Honourable members opposite can play the violin as much as they like but they will not drown out the memories of the Australian people of the mess that they made of this country

while they were in government. The government deficit rose--
Mr Kerin-It is seven years ago.
Mr HUNT-Memories are not as short as that. Seven years will not separate the Australian Labor Party from the memories of the Australian people. When the Labor Party took office the Budget deficit rose from 0.4 per cent to 4.9 per cent of the gross domestic product. In three short years the whole nation was plunged into an economic crisis of unprecedented proportions. In three years we endured three Treasurers who lurched from one desperate policy to another, from printing money to Khemlani loans. The present Leader of the Opposition presented to this Parliament an irresponsible Budget which led to a Budget deficit representing 4.9 per cent of gross domestic product. The present Budget has a deficit of only one per cent of the GDP-one of the lowest deficits in the western world.
The Australian Labor Party in government succeeded in plunging this country into an economic crisis. The Australian Labor Party in government presided over the worst years of industrial disputation on record. In 1974 we witnessed 6.3 million days lost and $128m lost in wages. The Australian Labor Party in government succeeded in destroying our reputation as an overseas trading partner and a nation that could be relied upon for safe and stable investment. The Australian Labor Party in government embarked upon an irresponsible spending spree which resulted in a huge Budget deficit year after year, inflation and rising unemployment. Yet the Australian Labor Party today seeks to convince this Parliament and, indeed, the electorate that it has the economic remedies, the answers to the current international economic problems and the internal economic difficulties.
1 contend that the Labor Party neither has the answers to solve the current economic problems nor the capacity or the will to do so. Nothing demonstrated this more to this House and to this nation than the Leader of the Opposition's speech in this debate and the so-called agreement between the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Council of Trade Unions on prices and incomes. There is no agreement with the individual trade unions over which the ACTU has no real control. What does it mean however? It means that a Labor Government would support full wage indexation and higher welfare spending in the hope that the unions will agree to wage moderation. It means that hundreds of thousands of people who are now employed could well lose their jobs if full indexation is restored. It means also increased government spending, higher

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1193

deficits, increased inflation and worsening economic circumstances in one of the worst international recessions this century.
There are no easy answers or easy options available to any government in Australia. There are no easy options available to the Australian people. The sooner the Opposition and the trade union movement recognise the hard truth the better the long term prospects for all Australians. Although in 1981-82 our real growth was 3 per centindeed it has been one-and-a-half times the average of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development countries since 1978 and we had one of the highest increases in private capital investment for 30 years-the truth of the matter is that our economy is now in recession. Our difficulties need to be viewed against the background of the worst world recession since the 1930s, a fall or stagnation in six of the major world economies in the March quarter-nobody can deny that as much as honourable members on the other side of the House might weep-the worst slump in world trade for over two decades, huge unemployed popUlations in the industrialised nations, a severe slump in the world steel industry, serious problems amongst many major overseas banking corporations--
Mr Campbell-Mr Deputy Speaker, I draw your attention to the state of the House. This really deserves an audience.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-A quorum is required. Ring the bells.
The bells being rung Mr Katter-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. Is there a stranger in the House? I do not remember seeing this gentleman before. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. Mr Hodgman-He has wandered in from the Soviet Embassy. Mr Campbell-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) just said that I should go back to the Soviet Embassy. I consider that to be a grave slur on me and I ask for it to be withdrawn. Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. In the comparatively unruly behaviour of the House the Chair was denied the opportunity of hearing the remark to which the honourable member for Kalgoorlie refers. I suggest that the same unruly behaviour provokes members into indiscretions. For that reason I will not call on the Minister to withdraw if he made the statement as alleged. (Quorum formed.)

Mr HUNT-It is quite clear that honourable members opposite cannot take the truth. There are serious problems amongst many major overseas banking corporations. There is a slump in world commodity prices and high interest rates in most overseas countries. On the domestic front our problems will be exacerbated by one of the worst droughts in eastern Australia this century, severe balance of trade problems and high interest rates. These problems are the most serious in some of the rural industries which are essential to the economy and to foreign exchange earnings. I represent one of the worst drought affected regions in Australia. On behalf of my constituents I welcome the initiatives taken by the Commonwealth Government to alleviate some of the burdens that the farmers, graziers and rural communities are carrying at the present time. The subsidy on interest rates above 12 per cent and the 50 per cent subsidy on fodder and cartage will give the farmers some heart and hope. If an effort had not been made by the Commonwealth Government to encourage the feeding of breeding stock I have no doubt that there would have been enormous stock losses.
There are difficulties ahead. There is no way in the current world economic recession that any government can protect every person, every employer and every industry from the full effects of the recession. However, a government can do its best to lessen the impact of that recession. I believe that this Budget and the recently announced drought relief measures go a long way toward helping to lessen the impact and to stimulate economic activity to the maximum extent possible.
The overall Budget strategy will provide assistance to those in need, incentive for investment, growth in the construction industry and job opportunities. All forms of Commonwealth welfare allowances have been increased. The average family with two dependent children and a home mortgage will be better off by $17 a week. Incentives to investment will be given by tax rebates on housing interest payments; substantial outlays to industry, including taxation incentives and depreciation allowances costing $700m; rebates on the first $1,000 of company dividends; increased retention allowances for small businesses; and tax incentives for employees to buy shares in the companies for which they work. Assistance to rural industry will be increased by over 40 per cent to more than $300m. There will be growth in the construction industry, and this will certainly be assisted by the home ownership and housing incentive policies already announced. There will also be increased funding of welfare housing,

1194 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

increased funding of aged and handicapped persons' accommodation, substantial increases of 26 per cent in funds for major Commonwealth public works programs, and increased assistance to the States for public works.
The introduction of the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program will add an estimated $2,500m to present road funds over the next six years. The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program will transform Australia's road network. It is the most significant roads program ever initiated in Australia. I hope the Opposition supports it to the hilt. It will benefit all Australians and will be particularly welcomed by decentralised and tourist industries, city businesses, transport operators, private motorists and indeed the primary and rural sector. The estimated $2.5 billion will substantially boost the level of Commonwealth financial assistance previously allocated to the States and the Northern Territory for roads. Expenditure this financial year is expected to be $150m. The total road funding by the Commonwealth in 1982-83 under the Bicentennial Road Development Program and the current ongoing program to the States and the Northern Territory will amount to $914m. This is an increase of 33 per cent, or $229m, when compared with the $685m allocated last financial year.
In 1983-84 when the ABRD program is fully underway Commonwealth expenditure for both road programs will be an estimated $1,208m, an increase of $523m, or 76 per cent, over 1981-82. Under the ABRD program the States and the Northern Territory will be required at least to maintain their own expenditure on roads in real terms. This is to ensure that the program funds are fully devoted to additional efforts on our roads. The major objectives of the program are to bring the national highway system to acceptable standards by 1988 so that it provides for the safe, reliable and efficient carriage of traffic between Australia's main centres; to accelerate the construction of current developmental road projects, including roads of national tourist importance; to assist the development of major urban and rural arterial roads and, when desired by the States, to provide assistance for approved urban public transport projects; and to enable local government authorities to upgrade their local road systems by 1988.
Motorists will be able to drive between all mainland State and Territory capital cities on completely sealed and virtually flood-free surfaces by the bicentennial year. Large parts of our heavily trafficked roads will be provided with divided carriageways and by-passes of major towns.

Substantial lengths of existing two-lane sealed roads will be reconstructed and widened, including narrow or flood-prone bridges. About 60 per cent of the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program funds will be allocated to the States and to the Northern Territory and their local government authorities for rural and urban arterial roads and local roads. There will, of course, be significant benefits to all road users: Savings in vehicle operating costs and travel time will be realised. Delays due to flooding which have been so common in North Queensland along the Bruce Highway and dust hazards which have been so notable on the Landsborough Highway in Queensland will be reduced. Most importantly, road safety will be enhanced. Probably one of the most important features of the program is that it will create job opportunities throughout Australia, particularly in the regional areas. It is anticipated that the program will directly create more than 8,000 new jobs in the road construction industry. All in all we expect that a total of at least some 20,000 jobs in direct and indirect employment will be created. A large proportion of these jobs, as I said earlier, will be in regional areas where jobs are so badly needed at present.
The Government is determined to ensure that the taxpayers get full value for the charges they are being asked to pay to finance this program. The revenues from this year's one cent per litre increase in the price of petrol and two cents per litre increase thereinafter will be earmarked and paid into a trust fund for expenditure on this program until 31 December 1988. The funds will not be spent for any other purpose. They will not be syphoned off into other expenditure areas. Apart from a substantial increase in capital funding for roads, the transport and construction portfolio expenditure provides for a substantial increase in capital works generally. All told, some $2,000m will be outlayed during 1982-83. That is an increase of 18.4 per cent, or $307.4m, when compared with 1981-82. There will be a 26 per cent increase in capital works this financial year. This expenditure of $368.4m will provide a significant boost to the construction industry. Almost all projects will be carried out under contract. About 50 per cent of the design work is done by private consultants at present. The construction and associated service industries will therefore share substantially in the increased activity. Repairs and maintenance of civil and defence facilities will increase by 14 per cent to $172 million, and the projects of course will become part of the national asset.
Apart from the recent decision to revitalise the Australian shipping industry on a commercial

Appropriation Bill (No. 1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1195

basis, several other initiatives are under way to enhance the capacity of the surface transport area to service efficiently the transport needs of Australians. In this session of Parliament I will be introducing legislation to improve the efficiency of the Australian National Railways Commission. That legislation will enable the Australian National Railways to adopt a more commercial approach, subject to any specific ministerial direction in respect of Public Service obligations. A deficit of $71.5m has been provided for this year but the aim is to achieve financial break-even by 1988.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the Government, in association with the States, provides support for the Australian Railways Research and Development Organisation. As I said earlier, the Budget provides for significant development of the Australian transport system which, together with the increased capital works expenditure, will provide a significant boost to employment, particularly in the construction industry. I am determined to obtain maximum value from the substantial outlays that have been made by the Government in this area. Australia's prosperity is vitally linked to our trading performance, which in turn depends on an efficient transport system and capital investment. During the coming year the Australian Railways Research and Development Organisation will be holding a series of workshops and a seminar on rail policy issues, seeking to reach agreement between the States to reduce railways deficits. Also, in association with the States and the Northern Territory, a joint working party has been established under the auspices of the Australian Transport Advisory Council to examine the development of an Australian transport strategy which recognises the respective roles of all three tiers of government. This examination was proposed by the Transport Industries Advisory Council. It will not be an introspective in-house examination. Anybody who has a particular view about our transport system-I mean users and operators alike-will have an opportunity to put that view forward.
This Budget will give the economy the degree of help that is required at present. It will provide job opportunities particularly in the construction area. The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program will undoubtedly not only provide job opportunities but also will ultimately lay the foundations for a really first class national road network. I can see why the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) is smiling. He has a lot to smile about because he loves driving on good roads.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (5.46)- Beneath the tinsel and show of this year's Budget lies an admission of this Government's bankruptcy. The Treasurer (Mr Howard), in his speech, admitted:
. . . It is difficult to envisage any real growth in domestic non-farm product in 1982-83 . . .
Farm production will decline; in 1982-83 business fixed investment could well decline; real private dwelling investment is still forecast to decline faster in 1982-83 than it did in the previous year; there is unlikely to be any real growth in employment in 1982-83. So with the labour force continuing to grow unemployment therefore seems likely to increase; and the outlook for the balance of payments will reflect the developing outlook both at home and overseas. In other words, our position will be gloomy. Not since the Menzies Government in 1961 has the Australian economy failed to grow for a whole year. Not within parliamentary memory has a government forecast no growth. This is a statement of political bankruptcy and the Government must take much of the blame for this state of affairs.
This Budget has been called a family Budget. Certainly concessions have been made to the family by means of increased family allowances and income tax relief. However, when one takes a close look at the Budget it becomes apparent that the Treasurer has taken more by means of sales tax, Customs and excise levies, bank duties, et cetera than he has afforded in income tax relief and sundry handouts. This Budget is cosmetic.
Income tax is, of course, the key revenue component in the Budget. This year some $18,973m will be levied from wage and salary earners. That is 45.4 per cent of the estimated Budget receipts. Another $4,373m will come from the selfemployed thus providing a further 10 per cent of estimated receipts. The Government's income tax package is a mixed bag. The Government is to be commended on the steps it has taken-limited, awkward and hesitant though they may be-in tackling the problem of tax avoidance. This move is long overdue. The Government has consistently refused to use its legislative powers to tackle tax avoiders. Treasurer Howard was briefed in 1978 about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. However it took him two and a half years to introduce the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act. I fear that this Government will not achieve even the modest target it has set itself in this regard, given the fierce opposition from within the Liberal Party's own

1196 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

ranks especially from my State of Western Australia. In any case, how can the Government know how much the Australian Taxation Office will be able to claw back when the Treasurer will not state how far back he will go to collect the money? This is a question which the community should be asking. After all, the money that the community will gain from tax avoiders is money lost to Liberal Party coffers. The Government has to temper its community responsibilities because of its party liabilities.
Earlier this month people in Kalgoorlie were graced by a visit from Mr W. W. Mitchell, member of the Liberal Party State Council and chief paid adviser to successive Western Australian Liberal governments. Mr Mitchell told us that the Treasurer's moves against tax evaders would do irreparable damage. Mr Mitchell stated:
The Federal Government is dominated by a philosophy of economic control and lacks the get-up-and-go spirit of the States which set goals to get things done and give people employment opportunity.
No doubt Mr Mitchell was referring to the wealth of opportunity to be found in the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth as well as the private tax avoidance industry. Mr Mitchell has since, of course, launched a $50,000 appeal to educate the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer as to the errors of their ways. I am sure that Senator Crichton-Browne, Syd Corser and Denis Horgan will be claiming their respective contributions as an educational tax deduction. The relief afforded in the Budget to low and average income earners by means of raising the tax free threshold and the top of the standard rate tax step, as well as reducing the standard rate of tax is to be welcomed.
Mr McLean-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I think that that was an unnecessary reflection on Senator Crichton-Browne and it should be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The Chair took note of the remarks but in the prevailing climate did not consider that they amounted to any greater reflection than has gone unnoticed during the day.
Mr CAMPBELL-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I did think that my remarks were modest. It is unfortunate that the Government has not seen fit to provide any substantial relief for the far-flung residents of my electorate. Last year, for the first time in a decade, the zone allowance rebate was adjusted. Now a taxpayer who lives in Zone A will get a base amount of $216 plus 50 per cent of the dependant's rebate. A taxpayer who lives in Zone B will get a base allowance of $36 plus 20 per cent of the dependant's rebate. Last

year a special category was created which allowed a $750 rebate plus a Zone A or Zone B dependant rebate, depending on locality, for any taxpayer who resides more than 250 kilometres from a population centre of 250,000 people or more. The creation of this special isolated zone was a step in the right direction, although it created severe anomalies in many places in my electorate. For example Leanora and Yalgoo are most unfortunate as they miss out by only a few kilometres.
It is unfortunate also that the Government again appears set on ignoring the needs of remote area residents for another decade. The current allowance is mere tokenism. At its existing level it cannot have any effect on decentralisation or provide any significant compensation for the disadvantage of living in remote areas. The Government must move now to increase tax allowances.
Once again, the Government has gone for an increase in sales tax. In 1982-83 total sales tax payments are expected to amount to $3,629m compared with $2,854m last year and $2,102m the year before that. In two years the share of the Budget revenue derived from sales tax has risen from 6.5 per cent to 8.7 per cent. I am opposed to this trend. I have said in this House before and I repeat it again now that all sales taxes are iniquitous; sales tax is indiscriminate. Everyone has to pay sales tax regardless of his ability to pay. This form of taxation hits poor and country people more than anyone else. Sales tax particularly discriminates against country people as it is levied on a percentage of the price of goods that pass from the wholesaler to the retailer and there is a freight component as well as the unit cost. As a result of sales tax increases, residents throughout my electorate are footing more of the overall tax bill this year.
The Fraser Government appears to subscribe to President Reagan's dictum that graduated income tax was invented by Karl Marx. We certainly appear to be heading down the road to an American situation of far greater reliance on indirect taxation. This is a trend that I feel must be reversed. As a result of this year's Budget an extra $595m will be levied from consumers in increased sales taxes. Local government suffers as it is guaranteed only a percentage of income tax revenue. I believe that this Liberal Government is determined to undermine the limited financial independence afforded to this most important area by previous Labor governments.
Last year in my speech on the Budget. I warned that once an item appeared in the schedule and became taxable the amount of tax levied would start to speed up. We now find that items such as

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1197

radios, televisions, stereos, cameras and jewellery will be levied at 32.5 per cent. Furniture, air conditioners, refrigerators and most electrical goods will be subject to a 17.5 per cent sales tax. Motor vehicles, spirits, soft drinks, toys and a whole host of other items will now be levied at 20 per cent. A number of items that were previously exempt will be subject to a 7.5 per cent duty. These include maps, hand tools, soft furnishings and servicing, repair and construction equipment. The tax on servicing, repairing and reconditioning equipment for motor vehicles, aeroplanes, ships and railway rolling stock will inevitably force up transport costs within my electorate and indeed throughout the whole nation.
Pet food is now subject to a 20 per cent duty. This must seriously affect the commercial exploitation of kangaroos. It is just another example of this Government's concern for country jobs. This issue was taken up by a Liberal Party member for Lower North in the Western Australian Upper House who was lamenting the Government's decision to tax the industry so savagely.
This year, as a result of the Budget, we find that a special surcharge on motor spirit and distillate is to be introduced. This must raise between $300m and $400m in a full year when the 2c a litre surcharge is reached. The only redeeming feature of the surcharge is that it will be set aside in a special trust account for road works. My electors will want to see some appreciable road works before they cop this. I have always held the opinion that sufficient funds are derived from existing crude oil and liquefied petroleum gas excise duties to cover an impressive road construction program. I note that this year the oil levy is up 3.9 per cent and will bring $3,287m into Government coffers. I cannot support this double tax on the motorist just simply in the name of road works. A portion of the existing crude oil levy should be set aside for road works.
The Budget envisages lifting the exemption from excise duty for off-road diesel fuel. This is designed to yield $176m in a full year. This new duty will adversely affect agriculture and the fishing and mining industries in my electorate. It must lead to higher transport and power charges. Bricks and road building materials will cost more, so will fuel for cranes, tractors, bulldozers, excavation equipment, on-site power generators, and other diesel-fired machinery. Once again, the country suffers more than the city. The Government is intent on gaining an extra $12.5m from increased air navigation charges. This will inevitably make it more expensive to travel within Western Australia and interstate. Air fares are already very high. It currently costs $90 to fly

from Kalgoorlie to Perth. It costs $174.20 to fly from Port Hedland to Perth and $291.50 from Kununurra to Perth. Since I got those figures a few days ago there has been a substantial increase in fares of the order of 7 per cent. The Government should be moving to check air fare price rises, not fuelling the fires. The very least it can do is to allow Trans Australia Airlines to compete on some of the lucrative interstate routes.
I now turn my attention to some of the Budget outlays. Despite their much heralded announcement, many Budget allocations are paltry. Under Prime Minister Fraser unemployment is a growth industry. How does he treat the unemployed? Unemployment and sickness benefits for young people under 18 years of age will rise by only $4 a week from $36 to $40-the first increase since 1978-and by only $6.30 from $58.10 to $64.40 for people over 18 years of age. The Government will no doubt expect these beneficiaries to live gratefully on the smell of an oily rag for another four years. Once again, pensioners received a pittance, with a $3.10 a week increase for single pensioners and a $5.20 a week increase for couples. No attempt has been made to index pensions realistically. It is commendable that the limit on permissible pensioner earnings has been increased, albeit for the first time in 10 years. I just wonder how many pensioners will be able to earn the extra income, given the current state of the economy. The easing of the income test requirement for the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme and Secondary Allowances Scheme is welcome. This will not, however, significantly ease the burden for parents in the north of Western Australia, where wages and costs tend to be high. I welcome the increase in funds for assistance programs for young unemployed. I regret that no significant plan for job expansion is contained in this Budget.
In the time. I have left I wish to say a little about the Liberal Party philosophy which underlies this Budget. Insofar as any economic theory has controlled the Fraser Government's economic policy, it has been based on these nostrums: Firstly, inflation is caused by deficits; secondly, if deficits fall inflation falls; thirdly, higher economic growth and a rising inflation rate are mutually exclusive; fourthly, a rising inflation rate makes people save a greater proportion of their income and therefore suppresses aggregate demand and growth; and fifthly, interest rate increases are caused by public sector borrowing demand and interest rates will fall if public sector borrowing demand falls. The great bulk of Australian statistical evidence contradicts all these beliefs. This

1198 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

now is becoming generally known by a long suffering public. The last and most damaging piece of Fraser-Treasury dogma that prices and incomes policies never work--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Mr CAMPBELL-How am I to refer to him?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Kalgoorlie is free to make reference to the Fraser Government, but that is the extent to which he may refer to the Prime Minister by name.
Mr CAMPBELL-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. The last and most damaging piece of Prime Minister-Treasury dogma that prices and incomes policies never work cannot be contradicted in Australia because it has never been tested.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Now that the honourable gentleman has got it right we will interrupt him.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr CAMPBELL-Before I was rudely interrupted by the suspension of the sitting for dinner I was saying that the last and most damaging piece of Fraser-Treasury dogma that prices and incomes policies never work cannot be contradicted in Australia because it has never been tested. It is, however, resoundingly refuted by overseas experience. An effective prices and incomes policy is the common denominator of success. All of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries with low unemployment and high growth-Austria, Japan, West Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and Norway-have used such a policy, and it has worked. In nearly all of them inflation has been kept remarkably low.
The circle of failure is complete. The Fraser Government has failed relative to the governments of other countries and to the Government it replaced. The magnitude of that failure is starkly revealed in the following comparisons. As at December 1975, the annual change in the consumer price index was 14 per cent and falling. In fact in the last quarter it was 10.4 per cent. As at June 1982 inflation was 10.7 per cent and rising. The seasonally adjusted annual growth rate for the half year to December 1975 was 1.5 per cent. To June 1982 it was 0.7 per cent. The non-farm seasonally adjusted annual growth rate for the half year to December 1975 was one per cent and to June 1982 was 0.2 per cent. Unemployment, seasonally adjusted, was 4.6 per cent in December 1975 and 6.7 per cent in June 1982, and is set to

increase by 50 per cent this year. In December 1975 our balance on current accounts showed a deficit of $794m. This is a significant figure, especially when compared with the June 1982 figure of a deficit of $9,080m-a deficit on current account of $9 billion. Those figures speak for themselves.
Yet this most mendacious of men, the current Prime Minister, had the gall to talk about reprehensible circumstances in 1975. On that occasion he and his discredited junta set out to destroy the reputations of good men; yes, even to drive them to an early grave. They did not do this because they believed there were reprehensible circumstances; quite the contrary. This boondoggling bunch of self-seeking charlatans did it because they knew that under Bill Hayden's guidance the economy was coming under control. They knew that with Bill Hayden in the Treasury the Australian Labor Party would get it together and go on to win the next election in 1977.
This scenario they could not stand. These people so blatant in lust for power were prepared to abort every vestige of common decency, every shred of Westminster tradition. They knew that with the jackals of the Murdoch Press they could fool the electorate, and they were prepared to
polarise the nation. They were prepared to demonstrate to all the people that might is right and that the law of the jungle prevails. These rogues set the standard of behaviour for the people of Australia. It is the Frasers, the Nixons, the Sinclairs and the Barwicks of this world who institutionalised the U Jack system in our land. It is their example and the shonky judgments of their Chief Justice that set the scene for the great tax scandals that now wrack this nation and cost the people of Australia so dearly.
But where do we go from here? Before Costigan I was saying there would be no early election; the Budget was a fraud and was seen as such and the last desperate fling of a desperate despot had failed. Now, of course, with Costigan the Government cannot risk an election and it cannot live with its falsified Budget. It will resort to the printing press as it desperately clings to the power it loves. The Government is caught in a tide it cannot stem. It will change its leader, but the public will not be fooled again. Australia must work as a united nation. Australia can only do this with a government of national reconstruction. A Hayden Labor Government is the only way we can heal the divisions amongst our people. If this Prime Minister has any shame, if he has any care for the future of our land he will take the only honourable course. He will call an election so that he and his ilk can be swept from power and make

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1199

way for a Hayden Labor Government. This is the only way that we can work towards national unity. This is the only way that he can expect or deserve any kindness in the valedictories that will one day be his.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (8.5)-One of the things that I learned very early in the piece on entering this House is that one really does need a sense of humour. After sitting through that particular diatribe I often wonder how people without a sense of humour can exist in this place. The honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell) in his speech today showed his own sense of humour. Obviously nobody in his right mind could take terribly seriously some of the stuff he has said. I was not going to spend too much time commenting on some of the statements he made, but I think they certainly should be corrected because he has accused the Government of all sorts of things, including fraud in its Budget. He has given us his rundown of the financial situation in Australia. Maybe some of these things should be corrected.
I suggest that he turn his mind to this morning's edition of the Australian Financial Review which does not have in this place a reputation as being terribly pro-government. On page 8 there is an article on how the cash flow crisis has floored developing countries. An analysis has been given, which is really very good, which gives the financial status of countries around the world. It is interesting that Australia does not appear in the list of countries that are having severe problems. In fact, of the 22 countries that are listed in this table, Australia certainly does not appear. I understand that we are much further down the list than that. If we try to line up our situation with those of the countries that are listed, we see that in actual fact our economy is in a fairly sound state. I was interested to hear the remarks of the honourable member for Kalgoorlie about the tremendous advances that have been made in Sweden. I suggest that he take a very close analysis of, for example, the unemployment rates in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. At the moment Sweden is experiencing an unemployment rate-
Mr Chapman-He is not interested in that point.
Mr JULL-No, he has left the chamber. Sweden is experiencing an unemployment rate of 11.9 per cent. So much for its job creation programs. If the honourable member wants to start talking about national debt, perhaps he should have a look at Denmark. At the moment Denmark has a bank rate of 23 per cent because it had to borrow to the hilt in Deutsche marks just

to look after its own social security system. Nobody is denying that the situation in Australia is very tight indeed. However, in terms of that, the Budget that was delivered in this House by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has in fact been a very generous Budget. Many people would suggest that in some respects that Budget may, in fact, be too generous. But to say that it is a fraud and a sham certainly does not stand up to a close analysis.
Two salient points came through to me in this Budget. First there was a philosophical commitment to spread the tax burden; that we move towards a broad based tax, with the emphasis on going away from income tax, thereby, in the long term, benefiting all Australians. Secondly-the honourable member for Kalgoorlie did admit this, I acknowledge that it is a family Budget. If honourable members do an analysis on the figures they will see that the Budget is in fact far from being a confidence trick. An average Australian who is earning $300 a week will be up to $17 a week better off than he was previously as a result of the Budget, even taking into account the higher sales tax and other charges that were introduced. In this Budget the total benefits available to an average family consisting of a sole breadwinner with a wife and two children paying off a $25,000 mortgage on their home, amount to $19.84 a week. However, the indirect tax increases admittedly can raise this family's weekly expenditure by about $3 a week. The largest single component of the increase was $6.69 in reduced tax rates, while the home loan increase rebate accounts for $5.05. That is real relief for one section of our community that has certainly suffered most severely.
If we are serious about making an effort to support the family unit and the concept of the family unit in Australian society, certainly this Budget goes a long way towards doing just that. The other overall Budget expenditures are interesting too. Defence spending, for example, is up by 11.8 per cent; education expenditure is up by 13.5 per cent; health expenditure is up by 16 per cent and housing expenditure is up by 24 per cent. Of course, the social security and welfare bill this year is up by 15.4 per cent, with 28.2 per cent of the total outlays in this Budget being spent in the area of social security and welfare. I get rather tired of the accusations that are being made to the effect that the Government really has no job creation programs. An analysis of the Budget will show that in a very real way capital works programs this year are going to be very much to the fore and in themselves are going to have the capacity to be able to create a great number of meaningful jobs.
Mr Chapman-Adelaide International Airport.

1200 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

Mr JULL-Earlier today the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) gave a run-down of the national roads program. I think that that program has been welcomed on both sides of the House for what it is going to provide for the people of Australia. That program alone is going to be a major job creation exercise. We have seen the commitment for the Burdekin Dam project. The honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) mentioned by way of interjection a few moments ago the amount of money that will be spent around Australia in the area of aviation. In recent years a number of people in Australia have realised that this is one area that needs very special attention. For example, in my own State of Queensland this year another $300m has been allocated to be spent over the next four years on upgrading a number of those airport projects. Naturally the new Brisbane International Airport will take about 50 per cent of that allocation. Within the new Brisbane Airport project itself another 4,000 jobs will be created. I think that is a very real example of how these capital works
programs can help create employment.
Major works also are being undertaken at Cairns, Townsville, Coolangatta, Maroochydore, Bundaberg and, of course, the secondary airport for Brisbane at Archerfield. This pattern of expenditure is not confined only to Queensland. In fact, there are major projects right around
Australia as Australia upgrades its facilities to take part in this tremendous boom in international tourism to Australia. I am sure that with
the additional works being done at Adelaide Airport, with Perth Airport being upgraded and the upgrading of other secondary airports around Australia there is this realisation that the tourist industry has a great deal to offer. One should welcome those projects. Of course, these job creation programs are such that they will mean long-term and meaningful jobs. They will not be the short, hiccup-type of programs that have been advocated by members of the Opposition which really give no long-term job satisfaction.
It is interesting to see the pattern of employment that is developing in Australia. Once again I will cite the situation that exists in Queensland. With the latest statistics just released by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs we can see exactly what is happening in Queensland. In fact, at the moment Queensland enjoys the lowest rate of unemployment in Australia and, indeed, the lowest rate of youth unemployment in Australia. I think we should always be careful to analyse just what is happening in this area. There is some reason for concern about what is happening in Queensland. There will be 25,000 young

people going on to the job market in that State this year. These are people who come from the State of Queensland. In addition, it is now estimated that 9,000 school leavers from New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia and their families will be migrating to Queensland during the Christmas period and will be looking for work.
There has also been a tremendous influx of New Zealanders into Queensland in recent times. The current rate of employment of New Zealand youngsters numbers 60 persons a week in Queensland, according to those figures. At the chance of upsetting our trans-Tasman friends I think this whole area of New Zealand migration needs some very close attention. I know that the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) has raised the subject with some concern. At the moment the plain fact is that we are getting a tremendous influx into Queensland of New Zealanders who are looking for work. That concentration is very much on the Gold Coast. If we look at the figures showing what has happened in recent years I suppose we can get an indication of just how serious the problem could become. In the last five years there has been a doubling of the number of New Zealanders coming to settle in Australia. The number of New Zealanders permanently living in Australia at the moment is in excess of 180,000. In the past we have always had something of a balance between the number of New Zealanders coming here, gaining employment and settling and the number of Australians going to New Zealand.
At the moment there are around 55,000 Australians living on a permanent basis in New Zealand but the number of New Zealanders here, in excess of 180,000, gives some sort of indication of the imbalance. I wonder just how long that situation can go on. I will cite as an example a situation that has developed in my electorate. I think the two critical electorates in the Queensland situation are the electorates of McPherson and Bowman which lie respectively on the Gold Coast and on the shores of Moreton Bay. In the bayside suburb of Wynnum, where there is some light manufacturing industry, an example came to light in recent days. One of the major clothing manufacturing companies there, one that is doing very well and which has had a major expansion in recent years, has been employing extra staff. Forty jobs were going in recent weeks. Applications were called. Jobs were advertised. Commonwealth employment officers were notified. In actual fact the person who runs that factory

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1201

employed 32 New Zealanders as part of that intake of 40 people. He tells me he did not particularly want to do that; he wanted to provide jobs for Australians but the Australians did not apply. He said that from talking to the 32 people that he put on it would seem that usually New Zealanders tend to find jobs in Brisbane within three days or four days of their arrival.
One wonders just what is wrong with the employment situation in that south-east corner of Queensland if we cannot get some of our unemployment figures down and some of those Australians who are looking for work into the work force. They are really quite remarkable figures. I believe that the whole area of New Zealand migration to Australia will have to be looked at very closely indeed. Of course, we realise that it is not only Queensland that is experiencing this tremdous influx of New Zealanders but other States of Australia too.
Mr Good luck-Tasmania.
Mr JULL-Maybe it is just that Queensland is a little better equipped to handle this influx than, for example, a State such as Tasmania, which the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) has just reminded me of. I will refer to another couple of points as they relate to Budget outlays. I mentioned the development work at Brisbane International Airport and the tremendous advances that could happen there. Within a matter of a forthnight Brisbane is to be the venue of the twelfth Commonwealth Games. I am sure that that event is going to be a great success. I was disturbed in recent days to see that the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works had recommended that the extensions to the new Brisbane International Airport should not be completed until 1990. I congratulate the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) for overriding that decision and deciding to continue with the works so that the project will be completed late in 1986 or early 1987, virtually on schedule. There has been some tremendous development there.
I took out some statistics on passenger arrivals and departures at Brisbane Airport during the last financial year. Last year 230,785 people arrived at the Brisbane Airport terminal. That was an increase of 17.25 per cent. Departures were up to 223,904 people, an increase of 20.39 per cent. Interest in Brisbane as an international destination is obvious. There were four new international carriers servicing that airport in the first six months of this year and another three carriers are giving indications that they will start services into Brisbane either later this year or early next year.

Obviously this raises the question of what is happening in the aviation market. Admittedly Queensland is becoming one of the major tourist destinations of the South Pacific but one cannot help but be perturbed at the continuing battle raging between the Commonwealth and New South Wales governments as to the future of Sydney International Airport. One would think there would be some very great argument in saying to the New South Wales Government that if it is not interested in coming to some agreement on exactly what should happen at the Sydney Airport complex we should look at making Brisbane the No.2 airport in Australia or indeed, if need be, even the No.1 airport. With the completion of that particular project it will have a lot of facilities going for it that, frankly, are not available in Sydney. One can look at the potential of what can be derived from a curfew free airport, which the new airport will be. One can also look at the prospect of putting into operation feeder services out of the Brisbane area to other parts of Australia. Certainly there is a lot of merit in this for the international operators. They can see some very real savings in the use of the new Brisbane International Airport complex.
Once again I would like to extend my thanks, and indeed the thanks of the people of my electorate, for that decision to continue with work on the new Brisbane International Airport and to go ahead on schedule. There is no doubt that aircraft noise has been a tremendous problem in the bayside suburbs of Wynnum, Manly and Lota and the areas of Coorparoo and Camp Hill in my electorate. It is good to know that the Government has acknowledged some of these difficulties and is prepared to go ahead and provide that sort of relief to the people of my electorate by continuing to complete that airport project.
Another area of the Budget which has raised quite a deal of comment in Queensland is foreign aid. Unfortunately, some rather prominent groups and personalities in Queensland say that perhaps Australia is spending too much on aid and we should be looking after our own first rather than developing some of the international aid projects. Whilst not coming into that argument, I was particularly perturbed at outbursts in the Press in Brisbane about the $10m that is being promised to the people who have been suffering in the Lebanon as a result of the war that has been continuing there since the early 1970s. In fact, the $10m that has been allocated I believe is a generous donation which will be used for humanitarian purposes. One can only support the Government in giving that aid and urge the

1202 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

people of Australia to give as much as they possibly can to help relieve the suffering that is happening at the moment in the Lebanon.
One would hope that following the withdrawal of the Palestine Liberation Organisation and the election of a new President, Mr Beshir Gemayel, who takes up his new position in the next few weeks, at last the people of that strife torn country will be able to receive some sort of peace. They have not been able to enjoy any sort of existence there for the last 12 years. It was a war in which the Lebanese themselves were not involved. It was a war which a number of Arab factions from that part of the world decided that they would fight on Lebanese territory. It was amazing to know that in fact the PLO seemed to be fighting a number of factions, the Iraquis and the Iranians were fighting their own particular war and the PLO and the Kuwaitis were having exchanges from time to time with the people of Beirut, especially West Beirut, being virtually caught in the cross-fire. Nobody is denying that the new President of the Lebanon, Beshir Gemayel, has a very hard task in trying to restore some semblance of order to that strife torn land. We can only wish him the best and hope that in some way there can be a sense of national reconciliation in that country.
Lebanon is one of the oldest civilizations in the world. It is a country that has recognised human rights for hundreds of years. It is a country in which people of different religions and persuasions have managed to live side by side in peace and harmony for the last 400 years. It was sad to see the dominance of human rights being torn apart by a war that was not of the making of the Lebanese people. We can only shudder in horror at the thought that elements in the Australian society would deny any aid we can give to that strife torn country. One would hope that the appeals for genuine welfare aid that are undertaken by the Lebanese community itself and the Red Cross organisation will be well supported. Of course, the Government has already acknowledged that donations to those campaigns will be tax deductible.
Once again, and in conclusion, let me say that I thought the most significant things in this Budget were the recognition of the very great difficulties facing the families of this nation, the recognition that tax relief was needed~tax relief was given~ and the recognition that high interest rates were affecting many young families. Tax deductibility for interest on home loans over and above 10 per cent will provide very real relief for the people who need it most. There was also a recognition that very great consideration must be given to the

aged and the underprivileged in our society, and that was given. To a great extent the Budget was a humane Budget. It is one that should be welcomed by all the Australian community. It showed real compassion, while in very hard circumstances it gave room for people to make their own way in Australia once again and for Australia to take advantage of the world situation once it comes out of the recession that is causing havoc world wide.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (8.25)~ This
Government and its Cabinet are undoubtedly the most incompetent, arrogant, divisive and hypocritical in Australia's history. The Government's incompetence is matched only by its hypocrisy and arrogance. It has introduced a no-hope Budget masquerading as a welfare Budget. But its welfare aspects are long overdue. In most cases the welfare elements are inadequate. They involve simply the indexation of benefits, pension thresholds and tax scales that should have been introduced long ago. The question is: When is a tax cut not a tax cut? The answer is, firstly, when it has elements of simple application of the consumer price index for 1981-82 to the existing tax scales and, secondly, when the total of increases in sales tax and excise duty more than equals the cut of 2c in the dollar in the basic tax scale. All that has happened is that the 10.4 per cent CPI rise for 1981-82 has been applied to the first two tax scales, which lifted the threshold of the first scale by $400 to $4,595 and that of the second scale by $1,606 to $19,500. So that is only a simple application of the 10.4 per cent consumer price index rise for 1981-82. The cut of 2c in the dollar in the basic tax rate is the only real tax cut in the Budget but that is more than offset by increases in sales tax and excise duty. The cut of 2c in the dollar on the lower tax scale means a loss to revenue of $706m this financial year and $1,066m in a full year. That is almost precisely equal to the increase in income resulting from increases in sales tax and excise duty, which amount to $786m in this financial year and over $1 billion in a full year.
The increase of 50 per cent to the income test threshold for age pensions is welcome but it is long overdue, simply being a recognition that no adjustment, at all had taken place since 1972. There is still no real increase, apart from the CPI adjustment, to base pensions. The unemployment benefit for single people is still well below the poverty line. However, behind the belated concessions that I have mentioned, if one reads the fine print of the Budget one will find a picture of unmitigated gloom. For example, the ~ Budget

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1203

Papers say that we can expect no real growth in non-farm output for 1982-83. Unemployment over the last financial year had risen by 100,000 to 460,500 as at 30 June last. The consumer price index rose in the last four years from 8.2 per cent in 1978-79 to \0.4 per cent in 1981-82. So after four years of this Government's vicious throttling of the economy the only result has been that unemployment has risen by 100,000 and the consumer price index has risen by 2.2 per cent. What is more, the prediction is that in 1982-83 the CPI will go up to 10.8 per cent. One per cent of this increase will result from the Government's increases in sales tax and excise duty.
In the last two years interest rates have gone up 4 per cent to the point where the Commonwealth Savings Bank rate on home loans is now a record 13.5 per cent, the building societies' rate is 15 per cent plus and the two-year treasury bond rate is 17.25 per cent. The balance of payments position is a complete trauma and disaster; the current account is $9 billion in deficit; and private capital inflow, on which the Government relies to balance its balance of payments books, is at a record $10.2 billion. The Treasury sees no hope of improvement. So despite seven long years of vicious attack on the Australian economy, what have we to show? We have increasing inflation over the past four years, no growth, exploding unemployment, record interest rates and an everdeteriorating balance of payments.
Despite all this no hope, doom and gloom, in the fine print of the Budget, the Government still hoped to sell it as pre-election Budget. It was going to make one last desperate gambler's throw for three more years in office before the voters woke up-woke up to the fact that Australia is in deep recession, on the brink of depression. Of course, all that has now been frustrated by the astounding disclosures and incredible exposures of incompetence, irresponsibility and economic and legal mismanagement that Mr Costigan exposed in his report. We now see the incompetence in the Treasury, the Taxation Office and the Attorney General's Department and a complete inability to combat the tax cheats. They have been able to pursue small, individual pay-as-you-earn income earners to the point of dragging working class payas-you-earn individuals before the courts, but they have gone in lightly on the big company crooks and on their crooked mates in the Liberal Party.
What has been the result? The result has been a loss to revenue over the past few years of $7 billion to $10 billion. Had that money been collected, every pay-as-you-earn taxpayer in Australia could now receive a $1,000 rebate cash in hand, which would not be a bad boost to the

economy. Had this Government and the Attorney-General's Department, as requested by the Taxation Office, prosecuted as recommended by Brinsden J. back in 1975, these schemes would have been arrested. There would have been noneed to peddle sales tax increases as a means of indirectly combating tax avoidance. There would have been no need for the Government to renege on its promise to implement full tax indexation. There would have been no disproportionate rise in individual pay-as-you-earn tax receipts compared with non-pay-as-you-earn receipts and no decline in company tax as a percentage of total taxes. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) say that they are not responsible and the people of Australia are supposed to be satisfied with the prosecution of three minor officials in Perth. What about the Ministers who have let this enormous loss to the revenue take place, and what about the person who was the Crown Solicitor in those years and who is now head of the Attorney General's Department? What is the Government going to do about it? It will take no action at all against those Ministers and bureaucrats who are responsible.
I ask the House to contrast this sick record of economic failure, ministerial irresponsibility and incompetence with Labor's plans and policies for when it reaches the government benches opposite. That will not be before very long, I assure the House, because we are willing to fight an election, if the Government is game, at any time it likes. Our plans and policies include a return to centralised wage indexation, which will not only control unnecessary wage increases to very high income earners but also give justice to the one and a half million people who have not received any wage increase due to the Government's destruction of wage indexation early last year. We will go for real income tax reform-not fairy floss income tax reform, and a real crackdown on the tax rorts-and a fair system of financing State and local government through revenue sharing, through a return to the system of block and tied grants to finance essential social services such as health services, through a new consultative approach to Loan Council borrowing programs with the States and through the guarantee of total funds to the States. We will introduce a new health insurance scheme under which people and families will be asked to pay only 0.75 per cent of their taxable income instead of up to $16 a week which they pay now and which many families cannot afford under this Government. There will be new housing policies in contrast to the hopeless record of this Government in that area. I believe

1204 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

housing, after unemployment, is probably our biggest social problem, and this Government must take full responsibility for record interest rates, record rents and the collapse of public housing construction in Australia. The dimensions of the problem are enormous. I know that over 100,000 people are on the waiting lists of the State housing commissions.
Mr Uren-Families.
Mr WEST-Families, I stand corrected by the honourable member for Reid, our shadow Minister for housing. Three times that number are in very poor accommodation, and we need at least 45,000 more starts a year than we are getting at present under this Government. Eighty per cent of new home seekers in this country cannot even get near raising loans at the minimum interest rate of 13.5 per cent that is required by the Commonwealth Savings Bank at the moment. Interest rates, as I said before-one cannot say it often enough-have gone up 4 per cent in two years. That means that someone paying off a modest little loan on a modest little house in an outer suburb of one of our great urban centres is paying $90 a month more than was the case two years ago. If this Government proceeds, as I am sure it will, into a deregulated Campbell situation we can expect an incredible increase of a further 3 per cent in interest rates, which will mean that such people will be paying another $70 a month on top of the $90 extra a month they are paying already.
This Government presides over a high interest rate regime. Its Budget scheme recognised that the March home loan amelioration scheme was not sufficient. It recognised that only 28 per cent of people in the housing loan market obtained relief. Now the Government has introduced a scheme of giving a rebate of 30c in the dollar on all interest paid over 10 per cent on loans up to $60,000. But there is no ceiling on the interest rate that is to be paid and no ceiling on the size of the actual loan. This can push people into fringe banking organisations and encourage them to take higher interest rate loans. Only 10 per cent of home owners or seekers now are involved in this sort of finance. This scheme will encourage more and more of them into it, while it will do nothing at all for those who cannot even get a loan in the first place or who may be renting accommodation.
The private sector in the housing area needs a number of policy applications, the first, of course, being to hold and then to reduce interest rates. But then it needs special measures to attract funds for housing finance, and certainly it needs an improvement to the existing deposit assistance scheme that this Government has implemented.

In the public sector this is the greatest disgrace of all because, in 1982-83 prices, only $318m goes to the State housing commissions this year compared with, in 1982-83 prices, over $900m in the 1975-76 financial year. A substantial increase is required in this area.
I turn now to some environmental issues. The Government has maintained its low priority for environmental matters. This Budget is a 'do the minimum possible' Budget to match the Govern-
ment's 'leave it to the States' policy. The manu-
facture, use, transport and disposal of hazardous chemicals is a major problem, yet for the third year in a row the Department of Home Affairs and Environment used 60 per cent of its meagre $40,000 allocation for hazardous chemicals. This year a staff of four will have to run a voluntary interim notification scheme for new chemicalsthat is, less than one-third the number deemed
necessary by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. I see that time is beating me, but as I wish to make some comments about the disastrous state of the steel industry I will have to cut short my remarks on environmental issues and return to them at a later date. However, I make the point that, despite this Government's alleged concern for the environment, only $19m, representing an increase of just 3 per cent, is to be spent on environmental matters this year.
I said that housing and unemployment were the great social problems of our times and that unemployment is a particular blight, especially for young people. It is stated in the Budget that the level of unemployment is now about 7 per cent and is expected to rise to 8 per cent in this financial year. That figure is definitely understated. I point out to the House that many great regional areas in Australia, particularly in the secondary industry and manufacturing areas, are currently experiencing unemployment rates not of 7 per cent or 8 per cent but of 12 per cent and 13 per cent. That is the case in the electorates of Macarthur, Hughes and Cunningham, in the great industrial area around Port Kembla. There is a crisis in the steel industry, a crisis caused by domestic recession, by import penetration, and by backward technology in the steel industry, which is a result of the steel division of the Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd in the boom years of the 1960s and early 1970s taking the money and running instead of reinvesting.
We have a falling consumption pattern. Imports have doubled in the last two years to one million tonnes of raw steel equivalent. In Port Kembla alone 2,000 jobs are already lost. This afternoon I spoke to the BHP steel division in Port

Appropriation Bill (No.l) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1205

Kembla. In the last year 2,000 jobs were lost, 1,425 jobs since June, and the loss of a further 2,000 jobs is expected in the next six or eight months in the steel mills and the ancillary rolling mills and metal shops. That adds up to a direct loss of 4,000 jobs. If we apply a conservative multiplier effect we are looking at another 4,000 jobs. That means that that area alone would lose 8,000 jobs in a little over 18 months to two years, on top of an existing unemployment rate of 12 per cent. When the Government knocked back the industry application to the Temporary Assistance Authority to restrict imports from such countries as Korea to 10 per cent or 15 per cent the responsible Minister said: 'We are looking after these 8,000 people who will lose their jobs through existing manpower programs run by the Commonwealth Employment Service in Wollongong'. He must be joking! I am no simple archprotectionist, but I understand that in a time of recession and depression we must look after our own and what we have and then try to restructure over the long term. We should not say: 'We have a contracting market in steel and we are going to peg imports at 1981-82 levels, which are historically record levels'. How ridiculous that is.
We need a new approach to the industry and a new approach to steel. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) has not been game to speak out during this debate on steel. He has the hide to go back to the IIIawarra region and say: 'Do not worry about it; I will ask the Government for more money for roads'. What we need is Government intervention in the industry. We need a role for the unions, government and steel management together, through a steel industry council. We need an inquiry into steel, a task force inquiry set up on a tripartite level-Government, union and company-to come forward with some long term industry planning policies. Industry assistance will be given in the short term by a Labor government while we restructure.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr WEST-That restructuring will be linked to the avoidance of job shedding in the steel industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat when required to do so.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (8.45)-It is self-evident that Australia's long term prosperity as a trading nation depends greatly on the size and

profitability of our export industries. These industries can be damaged by factors beyond our control, factors such as the present drought and depressed international trading conditions. They can also be damaged by factors which are very much within our control. Of these, the two which are crucial to the prosperity and long term development of our export industries are the effect of industrial action on our capacity to deliver to importers on time and the cost competitiveness of those industries. It is beyond doubt that our world-wide reputation for industrial disruption, especially in the ports and in the major natural resources projects, and the industrial facts of life which have earned us this reputation, have greatly damaged our export industries and have caused our major trading partner, Japan, which accounts for around 27 per cent of our exports, to look elsewhere. This trend, if it continues will put our future prosperity at risk.
As a nation, we have a duty to the present and to the future to maximise our natural economic advantages. Those advantages are obvious: The wealth of our land, what lies in it, and what we can produce from it. The extent of our dependence on Australia's natural wealth is demonstrated by the fact that around 70 per cent of our export earnings come from agriculture and mining. It is notorious that over the last two decades the major source of growth of exports has been mining. Has that growth come too easily?
With the vast increase in mining developments over the last 20 years, the great interest that overseas investors have shown in those developments, and the high profits made by some in the good years, a kind of cargo-cult mentality has grown up in Australia. A good part of the community seems to hold the view that resource developments are a twentieth century money tree and that all one has to do to get money is shake the tree. Inherent in this mentality is the dangerously erroneous belief, to quote Mr Les Millen of the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd, that 'resource developments are so profitable that no demand, however extraordinary, need remain unsatisfied if only sufficient industrial muscle were applied'. It is almost an article of faith among many that Australia is so uniquely endowed with natural resources that foreigners, and especially the resource-poor Japanese, will continue to come to us no matter the cost, the inconvenience or the levels of industrial disruption they are forced to endure. Those who believe that resource developments are an endless source of money need look only at the recent catastrophic results of major Australia mining companies.

1206 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

Those who believe that we are so uniquely wealthy that foreigners will continue to beat a track to our sometimes closed door should look hard at a few facts of our recent industrial history. Firstly, figures produced by the Japanese finance ministry's customs section show that in the six months to the end of June 1982 Australia's share of Japan's coke and coal imports fell to 35.5 per cent compared to 47.7 per cent for the corresponding half year in 1981. In steaming coal, our share of Japan's imports fell from 52.5 per cent for the first half of the calendar year of 1981 to 43.4 per cent for the first half of 1982. In sum, in the first half of 1982 compared to the first half of 1981 we lost 12.2 per cent of Japan's total import market for coal and coke and 9.1 per cent of Japan's steaming coal market. Those losses were made good by our competitors, who will be determined to retain their increased share in this huge and lucrative market. In iron ore, as reported in the Australian Financial Review on 6 September, the story is the same. Our total share of the Japanese market has declined from a peak of 48.1 per cent in 1976 to 45.2 per cent last year, while our major competitor, Brazil, has increased its share of Japan's market to 23.8 per cent.
The last annual report of the ship owners Mutual Strike Insurance Association shows that insurance claims by ship owners for losses caused by industrial disputes in Australian waters exceeded the combined claims for the rest of the world. The figures for the 12 months to 31 January 1982 show that Australia accounted for an astonishing 51 per cent of all claims. Apart from Canada and the United Kingdom no other country accounted for more than 3 per cent. This was the fourth year in which claims for losses in Australian waters exceeded the combined claims for the rest of the world-testimony of some kind to the national urge to break records. If we keep breaking records in this area we may break the country as well. The direct costs to the Australian economy of this gold medal effort in industrial disruption were estimated by the Association to exceed $150m and the indirect costs could exceed $300m. The hidden costs are incalculable.
The gravity of the malaise affecting Australian ports was highlighted by the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) on 18 September 1981. In a statement made that day he pointed out that so far that year there had not been a single day in 1981 which had been completely free of strikes affecting at least some sector of shipping. but our international reputation for industrial instability is not based on port disputes

alone. In the period 1975 to 1979, of the 15 countries in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Australia rated fourth in the incidences of stoppages in all industries and services. The implications of these figures are clear. It is much easier to acquire an international reputation for industrial instability and unreliability in meeting contracts than it is to rid oneself of such a reputation.
Contracts by Japanese companies to acquire what we mine involved the commitment of vast expenditures of money, often over long periods. Because Japan is virtually without any domestic reserves of raw material inputs which its industrial machine needs it is acutely conscious of its vulnerability to shipping delays caused by industrial unrest. There is no reason why the Japanese should have any special solicitude for our industria problems, nor why they should look at the delays that plague our export industries as being anything less than a mark of unreliability and irresponsibility. Given our recent track record it is only logical for Japan to move away from the very heavy reliance it has in the past placed on Australia as its primary source of raw materials for its industries.
Anyone who has visited Japan in the last 12 months and has talked to those involved in the import of those raw materials would have received, if he listened, a very clear message. With some incredulity that Australians could be so short sighted, that we could wantonly inflict such damage upon ourselves, Japanese industry has made a conscious decision to reduce its dependence on Australia for its raw materials. If this trend persists--and there is no reason why other importers of our raw materials should judge us differently-it must bring several consequences. In the short term, it will bring losses in export earnings. These losses are already reflected in our balance of trade figures which, excluding invisibles, have moved from a surplus which we enjoyed through the 1970s to a deficit of around $3.4 billion in the 1981-82 financial year-a deficit which in turn contributed to a current account deficit of just over $9 billion or around 6 per cent of gross domestic product for that financial year. Of course, in the medium and longer term we face cancelled and deferred developments, a reduced export trade and diminished national prosperity. A drastic reduction in the effect of industrial strife on our export industries is not merely desirable but essential to our survival as a prosperous nation. We are all involved-employers, employees, the Government, the unions and the nation as a whole. We

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1207

have a great deal to learn, a great distance to travel and little time.
The second of the factors that affect our export industry and one which we can control is cost competitiveness. It is directly and profoundly affected by the levels of wages and salaries. Wage restraint is central not only to our international competitiveness but also more generally to the prosperity and level of employment in our country now and in the future. By international standards and by any sensible reckoning we are living beyond our means. Recent wage settlements in the United States of America and West Germany demonstrate that employees in those countries are coming to realise the truth of the maxim: One man's wage rise is another man's job. In wage negotiations in West Germany this year unions agreed on pay increases which were less than the inflation rate. The same approach to wage increases has been shown by unions in the United States. The motor vehicle industry provides a striking example. Last April workers in the General Motors company voted to ratify a 2t year agreement under which the United Auto Workers Union agreed to forgo any pay increases during most of the life of the contract and to forgo progress towards a shorter working week. This followed a 'standstill' agreement with the Ford company and a 'give-back' agreement with the Chrysler company.
The need for restraint in wage demands and the acceptance in America of the necessity of increases less than the current rate of inflation were summed up by Mr Art Gundersheim, an official of the 400,000-strong American Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, as reported in the Bulletin of 20 April this year. He said:
'The worker ultimately feels the availability of a job is more important than his income level. It's a reasonable, rational trade off. In periods of great economic difficulty there have always been concessions. In Chicago in the 60s I can remember workers at one company voting for a 10 per cent wage reduction '.
By contrast to the common sense and restraint summed up by Mr Gundersheim we evince a lemming-like, national determination to use today's pay rises to destroy tomorrow's jobs and opportunities.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics figures for the 1981-82 financial year show that average weekly earnings soared by 17.4 per cent-some 7 per cent above the rate of inflation and in real terms roughly 4 per cent above the increase in gross domestic product for that year. In the same period our rate of inflation was some 4 per cent above the average of our major OECD partners. This means that we are paying ourselves more

than we can afford. Given the harsh economic conditions in which we live it is easy to find examples of where this kind of conduct leads. I will give two examples. First, the latest national accounts show that gross operating surpluses of trading enterprises fell by 4 per cent in the December quarter and by 14 per cent in the March quarter. Secondly, a short time ago, and within the space of three days, some 850 jobs were lost in New South Wales following three separate management decisions. The most significant of those decisions was that of Amco Wrangler Ltd to take some of its operations off-shore. This decision is but one example of an ominous trend.
In present economic circumstances no country can afford wage and salary increases that constantly exceed the rate of inflation. Any trading nation that adopts such a course can be perfectly sure of the medium and long term consequences. For Australia those consequences will be: Decreasing international competitiveness which will affect not only our export industries but also our whole manufacturing base as we become more vulnerable to foreign penetration of home markets; the shedding of labour by employers at an increasingly rapid rate; companies and jobs going off-shore, which means a permanent loss of jobs; and insolvencies and company collapses. What can we do? In the Budget the Government offers Australians a clear opportunity and a clear choice-an opportunity for wage and salary restraint in the interests of all, and a choice between community acceptance by Australians of restraint, or a re-run of Whitlam economics, which is what the Australian Labor Party proposes.
The sincerity of the Government is evidenced by its profound commitment to meet the needs of the average and middle wage earner, the family man and those in need. This commitment is demonstrated in this year's Budget by such unarguable benefits which are to become effective on I November as: The increase in the tax free zone to $4,595; the reduction in the standard rate of income tax from 32c to 30c in the dollar; the lifting of the threshold from $17,884 to $~9,500 at which every extra taxable dollar attracts tax at the rate of 46c; the introduction of a 50 per cent increase in the family allowance for the first and second children; and the allowance of tax rebates at 30c in the dollar on interest payments over 10 per cent on housing loans up to $60,000. Other measures include: Assistance to pensioners and the handicapped; action already taken to counter tax avoidance and proposed action against tax evasion.
These are facts in place-commitments on the record. In return the Government asks, in the

1208 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

national interest, for wage and salary restraint and for no further reduction in hours of work. What is Labor's answer? Three days after the Budget was delivered the Leader of the Labor Party and the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions issued a joint statement. Stripped of its rhetoric the statement has two key elements. The first key element is the adoption, in a centralised system of wage indexation, of full cost of living adjustments, including maintenance in real terms of existing levels of over-award payments, together with a variety of other benefits. Such an approach ignores world economic conditions, ignores Australia's economic condition, ignores the cost to the economy and to Australia's future prosperity and ignores the plight of the many workers who will be thrown out of employment as a direct result of the adoption of this policy. The second key element is the adoption of statutory controls on prices and profits, thinly disguised as a pricing authority with legislative criteria to assess price proposals of corporations within its jurisdiction. Those corporations-the large ones will be the pace setters-will be reassured to know that under Labor they will be allowed to earn reasonable profits-meaning, no doubt, what a Labor government thinks they should get. They would be unwise to hope for generosity, sympathy or even a basic understanding of the economic and financial constraints under which they operate.
Of Labor's proposals it can only be said either that the Labor Party operates in a cocoon of economic ignorance and believes that God made special rules for the Australian economy or that deliberately, and with full knowledge of the economic damage inherent in its proposals, it is willing to put Australians out of work, to destroy future employment prospects and to erode the progress of any future economic recovery-all this in pursuit of putting together a program that it hopes to be electorally palatable. The danger of the mixture of full indexation and other benefits and statutory controls on prices and profits was clearly expressed by Monsieur Jacques Larosier, the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, at a management symposium in Davos, Switzerland in March of this year. He said:
There is an urgent need for a more realistic alignment of wage demands with a prospective growth of real output and employment. The restoration of adequate profit margins-to provide the incentive and resources for growth-clearly requires that real wages be held below productivity gains for some time to come. A special problem arises in those countries where wage indexation schemes exist. Schemes of this sort are a many-headed evil.

It is precisely that evil that Labor proposes, and if Monsieur Larosier's criticisms had been specifically directed to Labor they could not have been more apt. The Executive Director of the International Monetary Fund realised the need for restraint. German and American unions accept that in present conditions-conditions not peculiar to Australia but prevalent throughout the worldrestraint and acceptance of less than what is needed to keep up with inflation is necessary. Mr Wran, the Premier of New South Wales, to his credit a few weeks ago publicly acknowledged the need for restraint, but not the Federal Labor Party. Labor's answer to our economic problems, and specifically to our need to regain cost competitiveness, amounts to higher wages, increased government expenditure, government job creation-a policy which entirely overlooks the fact that jobs have to be paid for out of taxes or out of profits and that in the long run permanent jobs can be created only out of profits-and control of prices. Controls on prices are the last things we need. They are an active incentive not to invest, not to create jobs and to go off-shore. They stifle initiative, enterprise and profits, and without a profitable employer one cannot have a profitable employee.
The ACTU and the major unions have an historic opportunity to work with the Government and to achieve restraint in regard to salaries, wages and other benefits in the interests of all Australians. To refuse to do so is to consign an increasingly large number of the Australian work force to the bitterness and misery of unemployment.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (9.4)-This Budget was framed with only one objective-to help the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) win an election this year. It is the most cynical Budget. I have seen in the 13 years in which I have been a member of parliament, and in my view it will be seen by the Australian people as just that-a cynical vote-buying exercise. The Budget also clearly shows the contempt in which the Prime Minister holds the Australian voter. What the Prime Minister is really saying to the people of Australia is this: 'For seven years I promised you that if you returned a Liberal-Country Party Government there would be prosperity for all. If you are prepared to practise restraint, self-denial and a real cut in living standards, nirvana is just around the corner. However, after seven years I have to tell you that it will not happen. In fact next year will be the worst year since the Depression. The level of unemployment will go well over the half million mark, interest rates will remain unbelievably high, there will be no growth and many

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1209

businesses will go bankrupt'. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the economic indicators on inflation, unemployment and growth in the non-farm product area prepared by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICS GROUP
Economic Indicators

Year

Inflation rate(a)

Growth

Unemployment(b) in gross

non-farm

Number

Rate product (c)

1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

%

'000

%

%

6.0

132.5

2.3

5.2

13.0

124.0

2.1

4.2

16.7

288.2

4.7

1.0

13.0

275.9

4.4

2.0

13.8

353.8

5.5

2.8

9.5

395.3

6.2

1.1

8.2

296.6

6.2

3.7

\0.1

413.6

6.2

2.1

9.4

375.5

5.6

4.7

\0.4

449.9

6.6

2.3

(a) Annual percentage change in Consumer Price Index (All Groups Six State Capitals Index).
(b) Number and rate for May of year shown.
(c) Annual percentage change in Gross Non-Farm Product at Average 1979-80 Prices.
Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service.
Mr COHEN-Anybody who takes the time and trouble to examine these statistics will see a clear picture of the Government's failure. The inflation rate in 1975-76 was 13 per cent-these are the Parliamentary Library figures-and it is now around II per cent. There has been a slight reduction in inflation. The level of unemployment in 1975-76 was 275,900, and the latest figures show that it is over 470,000 and rising. The growth in the gross non-farm product area in the first three years of the Labor Government was 5.2 per cent, 4.2 per cent, one per cent and 2 per cent. Last year the figure was 2.3 per cent. We are told that there will be no growth at all this year. That is the result of the seven years of restraint and selfdenial that has been asked of the people of Australia.
We are facing an economic disaster. In this Budget the Prime Minister is saying this: 'We, the Liberal Party and the National Country Party, have failed miserably to fulfil any of our promises. Although we failed, it is not our fault; the fault lies with the world recession'. State governments, trade unions, and even the weather are blamed for Prime Minister Fraser's mistakes. The one thing our beloved Prime Minister is totally consistent

about is never accepting responsibility for anything bad that happens in this country. He is responsible only when something good happens. This Budget is an admission of total failure. Having admitted that the Government has failed and that he does not know what to do about the state of the economy, the Prime Minister, in a most incredibly cynical manner, offers a range of goodies to the voters to tempt them to trust him once again. Let me assure the Prime Minister that the old saying-I hate using cliches but one has to be used here-'You can fool some of the people some of the time but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time' was never more appropriate than at this moment.
The Australian voter has a very high threshold of pain when it comes to Australian politicians, particularly conservative politicians, but that threshold was reached just a few months ago. At the last election enough Australian voters still believed that Malcolm Fraser had something up his sleeve besides his arm. They believed him when he said the resources boom which he, the Treasurer (Mr Howard), and the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) trumpeted from one end of the country to another was to eventuate. Enough people were still mesmerised by the pots of gold-the Australian EI Dorado; the Liberal Utopia-to give him and his colleagues just one more chance. The Liberals well know that the result of the last election, their 23 seat majority, was very much closer if they look at it in terms of votes and not seats. Nearly all donkey votes in some extremely close results in a number of very marginal seats favoured the Government, but the Government knows as well as we do that a further uniform swing of a little over one per cent would have seen it in opposition. Since then the number of our seats has increased by one and the Government's majority has slipped even further.
The simple fact-I think more and more Government members are reaching this conclusion-is that time has run out. There is a point in the life of every government when the voter no longer believes in anything that it says. No government in Australian history has been given a fairer go than the Fraser Government. Three times the people of Australia have given it a mandate to deliver the promises that the Prime Minister made in 1975. For five years it has had massive majorities in both Houses. For the past two years it has had a comfortable majority in the House of Representatives, whilst in the Senate-I think I am right-only two Bills have been twice rejected. No one in his wildest flights of fantasy could claim that the rejection of either of these Bills has seriously affected the Government's

1210 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

economic policies. Therefore the Government cannot use the excuse that it has not had all the opportunities. It has had solid control of both Houses.
The point has now been reached when people's patience has simply run out. They now know that the Prime Minister has tried everything and blamed everyone but himself for failing to deliver the goods. Whenever the election is held, be it November this year or Mayor December next year, the people will deliver their verdict clearly and unequivocally. The only question now is the size of the Australian Labor Party's majority. It is well to keep reminding the Government and the people of Australia of the promises which were made by the Prime Minister in his 1975 policy speech. One would not think that it would be exciting to read that document but it is worthwhile doing so if only for its humour. I will quote some of the statements which were made in the superb document of 1975. It stated:
Let us all as Australians determine to restore prosperity, defeat inflation and provide jobs for all. The Liberal and National Country Parties have prepared a far-reaching programme to restore prosperity and to give effect to our philosophy of freedom, opportunity and concern for the individual.
The document further stated:
What can be done immediately, and must be done, is to establish--for the first time in three years~sound and honest management of Australia's affairs.
Mr West-The great economic managers.
Mr COHEN-It is hard to believe but it is all on the record, as the honourable member for Cunningham points out. The document also stated:
We have a comprehensive strategy to restore prosperity.
I am delighted to know that what we have seen in the last seven years has been a strategy. I was concerned that it just happened by accident but it was all planned. The mind boggles at what might have happened if the Government had lacked a strategy, if it had all gone on ad hoc. The document also stated:
The major element in this strategy is to bring about growth in production in the private sector.
In 1975 the Prime Minister said it all and what a dismal, depressing sight this country now is with the mess he has got us into. The situation is grim and it is getting grimmer but all the Prime Minister can do is search around for excuses and people to blame. I would really have some admiration for the Prime Minister if, just once, he would say: 'It is our fault; we take responsibility'. When billions of dollars of projects were being announced he could not get on the air fast enough. He had to push the Treasurer and the Minister for Industry and Commerce out of the way so that he could

claim credit for the massive minerals boom that was about to occur in Australia.
Mr MorrisEI Dorado.
Mr COHEN-That is right, an EI Dorado. Now, as projects are being cancelled daily, the Prime Minister is strangely silent on these matters. If there is anyone in Australia who is responsible for workers demanding some share of the cake it must be the Prime Minister because he sold that boom to the people and they, not unnaturally, thought that if it is going to be so good they ought to get their share of it. So if there has been a demand for higher wages the problem can be sheeted right home to the people who sold that prosperity, that boom.
However, let me say that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and my colleagues have welcomed many of the new Budget measures which alleviate some suffering caused mainly by this Government's policies. Most Budgets contain some good things and this one is no exception. There are some things in it that I welcome. The increase in the family allowance is one. The single measure that I approve of most is the introduction for families on a low income, I think, of $184 a week, of a family income supplement of $10 a week for each dependent child. That is something that should have been introduced a long time ago by previous governments, both Labor and Liberal. I hope that my party, when we come to government soon, will expand upon that area because I think that that is the area of greatest need in Australia. Many other improvements have been made. The standard pension has been increased in line with the consumer price index. The amount pensioners can earn and the level of fringe benefits have been increased.
I have grave doubts about the benefits of a home loan interest rate rebate. Whilst people who are building or buying homes need some relief from the enormously high interests rates I fear that this rebate provides an opportunity for all sorts of people to rip the system off. That is a term I do not like but unfortunately that is what I fear will happen. As yet I see no reason why somebody who owns his own home cannot borrow $60,000 and use it to buy a boat or go on a holiday. This loophole must be closed up and there have to be much tighter controls so that the benefit goes to people who are most in need, who are genuine home owners and who are paying very large interest rates.
However, the cynical part of this Budget is that it benefits people who do not need assistance a great deal. No one is more abused about the salary he gets than a politician. I have had a look at this

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1211

matter. I get a whole range of benefits such as the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance for my son, a family allowance for my first two children and the home loan rebate and the tax reduction. That is great but surely people who are on our level of income are not exactly in the needy bracket. We are reminded of that--
Mr L1oyd-You should not qualify for a TEAS allowance.
Mr COHEN-My son qualifies for a TEAS allowance.
Mr Lloyd-In other words he has left home.
Mr COHEN-That is right.
Mr L1oydI will make a comment about that.
Mr COHEN-You will make an apology about it, I hope.
Mr L1oyd-1 didn't sayan apology; I will make a comment.
Mr Les Johnson-Your government is responsible for it.
Mr Lloyd-The point he made was that with his salary his son was still entitled. He did not explain the position correctly. He was giving a wrong impression of the relationship between the TEAS allowance and salaries.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member for Murray will cease interjecting.
Mr COHEN-Let us delete that from it. Let us forget about the TEAS allowance and let us just deal with all the other benefits. They ought not to go to people who are earning $39,000 a year. My son is an independent person who is living on his own.
Mr L1oyd-1 will pick you up on all the others if you want to but that was one I thought was too rough to allow to pass.
Mr COHEN-That is the cynical part about this--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Will the honourable member for Robertson address the Chair? The honourable member for Murray will have his opportunity at a later date to say a few words and that is when he should take up the matter.
Mr COHEN-We will all wait with breathless expectation for that. I want to devote what time. I have left to talking about job creation schemes. This afternoon we heard one of the prize clowns of the Parliament, the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey). He has been here a very short time but he has become an expert on job creation schemes. Most of his time he spends berating

the attempts of the Labor Government in 1972-75 to create jobs for the many fewer unemployed at that time. One of the tragedies of this Government is its refusal to acknowledge that job creation schemes can help. They can help; that is the point I stress. They are not and never have been a total panacea of the problems of unemployment. There are major problems such as a world recession which we are well aware of. The Australian Labor Party has never suggested that job creation schemes or schemes such as the Regional Employment Development Scheme are an answer to unemployment. They represent one of the weapons that a government can use.
Mr West-It is a short term weapon.
Mr COHEN-It is a short term weapon which a government can use to alleviate problems particularly in areas which are badly hit. For the last two years we have had to listen to the unadulterated drivel in this place by the honourable member for O'Connor. Apparently he became involved in his area and discovered that people were ripping off the system. As he comes from Western Australia and he is a member of the Liberal Party, nothing surprises us.
His simplistic Ayn Rand bulldust that he goes on with shows the complete lack of understanding of how the job creation scheme worked. These backwoodsmen come here with simple nostrums and shout and scream at everyone that the only answer to the problem is hard work and productivity. Let me just deal with that simplistic argument-that all one has to do is go out and work hard. I ask honourable members to look at the mining industry. One could work fiat-tack at the moment mining everything and one would not sell an ounce of it. Nobody wants to buy at the moment.
Let us look at retailing. I happen to be in the retailing industry. I am one of the few people in this Parliament who are businessmen, who have business experience. How much harder do honourable members think one can work in the retailing sector and how much more money do honourable members think one can take if there is no demand and the consumers are not buying? One could stand on one's head and wave one's legs in the air; consumers are not going to buy anything. So do not tell me that that is a solution to the problem. The situation is the same in the agricultural sector. Most of the problem in agriculture is that when growers produce they overproduce and the price goes down. They lose money for that reason.
Mr Les Johnson-The Minister is still selling his Clydesdales.

1212 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982-83

Mr COHEN~Absolutely. Look at the manufacturing sector. If honourable members read the Sydney Morning Herald yesterday they would have seen an article by John O'Hara. The Minister of the future, the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones), has been writing some superb stuff showing that the future of Australia lies with our moving into the technological area and providing grants in the areas of manufacturing and technology so that we can take advantage of the inventiveness of Australia and keep new
patents, new industries and new scientific and technological breakthroughs in Australia instead of their being sent to other parts of the world. The Interscan system is a particular example of our losing an Australian invention to overseas interests. It is just nonsense to say that the only answer is hard work and productivity. There is a whole range of answers. I find the attitude of these backwoodsmen like the honourable member for O'Connor who makes these sorts of nonsensical speeches in this place attacking job creation schemes quite sickening. No one in this House has had more experience with job creation schemes than I have had. In my electorate of Robertson I managed to get more job creation schemes into operation than in any other electorate in Australia. That is on the record. Back in 1974-75 I got $9m, which would be about $25m in today's prices. We had about 150 projects in that area. At one stage we reached a peak of 850 workers directly employed under the Regional Employment Development scheme. Over a period of 18 months 2,150 workers went through that scheme directly. All those people who were able to get a decent salary could spend some of that money, indirectly, that created hundreds more jobs. Left on the ground are the great benefits to the community. There were drainage and water schemes, sporting facilities, youth centres, tennis complexes, kerbing and guttering. What we did in that period was to advance the local government's programs in some areas by 20 years, according to the statements made by the local Wyong and Gosford shire councils.
Of course, mistakes were made. I took 12 months of my political life to analyse them. I produced a paper on and a reassessment of the RED scheme. Of course, mistakes were made. There would be no problem in eliminating 95 per cent of those mistakes from the experience that we had during the two years that the RED scheme operated. There were misconceptions in the minds of the public about how it operated. The media, of course, was quick, as it always is, to focus on one of the projects. On programs such as This Day Tonight or Nationwide it was said:

'Look, the whole scheme is rotten because here we have a case of it not working properly or efficiently'. Let me tell honourable members that in my area there were cases in which the local councils were embarrassed because the RED scheme workers were better than the council workers. We could not say that publicly at the time but they were doing the work faster and more efficiently than the council workers were. We found that they were doing it more efficiently than the private sector.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DRUMMOND (Forrest) (9.25)~ This is a Budget that the electors of Australia have been waiting for. It is a Budget for families. It leaves more money in the pockets of the taxpayers. For the first time it gives average Australians the incentive to invest in their own and their country's future. I am sure that a lot of people are saying 'It's about time too' on learning of the cuts in income tax. Tax cuts are what the Liberal Party stands for~letting people decide how their earnings should be spent rather than governments grabbing the money and doing it for them. Even critics of the Government have to admit that these cuts are substantial~an extra $7.65 a week for the pay-as-you-earn taxpayer on average earnings of $344 and the raising of the standard rate to $19,500 so that 75 per cent of taxpayers will pay no more than 30c in the dollar.
It is equally commendable that a special emphasis has been given to assisting those people who have come to feel that they are being left behind~the single income family with a mortgage. The higher spouse rebate, the increased family allowance payments and the extension of interest rate relief to all home buyers will together ease the burden of costs on these families. This does not mean that some of us on the Government back bench will not continue to advocate the splitting of sole breadwinners' incomes for tax assessment as the best long term means of securing tax justice for the single income family, but this Budget is a big step forward.
In the medium term, lower taxation and an increased family allowance give a real incentive for the wage earner and the trade unionist to reject higher wage demands. I appreciate very well that a family struggling with a mortgage and a high personal tax bite will not appreciate the finer points of the need for wage restraint. Now, however, the pressure should be reduced with a tax cut having the same effect as a wage rise. More and more electors are now realising that wages

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1213

cannot keep rising so far in advance of productivity -least of all when growth is sluggish. High wage demands not only make our industry uncompetitive but also simply price labour out of the market. People become too expensive to employ. Despite the reception given by the Australian Council of Trade Union leadership, which seems more worried about the seizure of the initiative by the Liberal Government than concerned for the long term good of its members, I am hopeful that the rank and file unionists, the very blokes whom this Budget sets out to help, will take a different view. If with their co-operation the so-called trade-off works it will be a very strong blow against inflation.
There are, of course, more long term considerations that are equally important. Within the constraints of economic responsibility every Liberal National Country Party Government has a duty to work towards the lowering of direct personal tax. We stand committed to maximising incentive and freedom of choice. Shifting some of the tax load to indirect taxation, as this Budget does, gives the taxpayer that extra discretion as to how his dollar will be spent. I have always been wary of sudden lurches into massive indirect taxation of the kind that could disadvantage the low income earner and hamper the small businessman with the weight of administrative bureaucracy. Hence, last year many electors of Forrest were concerned that the projected rise in sales tax was not matched by a reduction in direct taxation. This time, however, there is no denying that the modest rise in sales tax will be more than covered by the cut in income tax and the increases in social security payments.
It does not hurt to point out that Australia in the last available survey of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries ranked low in the scale of the proportion of gross domestic product consumed by indirect taxes-fifteenth on a list of 22,8 per cent of GOP against a 10 per cent average. Direct taxation, however, accounted for 12l per cent of GOP. There is in my opinion some room for a gradual shift from direct to indirect taxation provided always that it will not increase the overall tax burden. At this juncture it is appropriate to stress an important advantage of indirect taxation-that it is harder to evade. So often we overlook the fact that the greatest revenue loss comes not through the notorious tax avoidance schemes; it comes through straight concealment of income in small amounts but on a massive scale-the underground economy. On one estimate, this was as much as 10 per cent of gross domestic product. If

on both sides of the political divide we are genuinely concerned about tax evasion we cannot afford to condemn the idea of a gradual shift to more indirect taxation. It makes sense to me to curtail the underground economy in this way rather than to pursue thousands of tradesmen and contractors over concealed cash income.
There is a third main source of tax revenue, that is, tax on capital. This Budget is free of that blight, and the people I represent will say 'Amen' to that. As a Liberal I am totally opposed to any seizure by the state of the assets of a citizen and the crippling of his economic liberty that can only
erode his freedom. It is one of the great differences that divide liberalism and socialism. I remind the House that it was this Government which in the last Parliament removed the cruellest of all taxes on capital-probate. The inspiration might have come from Queensland, but it was the Fraser Government that abolished it at the national level and thus thwarted the attempt of the Cain Government in Victoria to impose it on the people of Victoria. I will always be proud to have supported a government that has stood up for genuine principles on this matter. It will stand as a blot on the records of previous coalition governments that they tolerated the evil of death duties. People remember well the effect of probate on the farm and the small businessman, the intrusion of the tax gatherer at a time of private grief.
We should remember that when this House removed probate in 1978 the Australian Labor Party was not prepared to vote against such a popular move, yet Opposition speakers made it clear that they held strong commitment to both this and other forms of capital taxation. We heard then and we hear now complaints that Australia is one of the few Western nations without a significant tax on capital. Frankly, this is a fact that
makes so many of us proud to be Australians. New Zealand is one of the few countries which are free of poisonous snakes. By the same logic, I
suppose, there are people there bemoaning that fact and wanting to import a few.
I wish to make special mention of an important innovation contained in this Budget, that is, the rebate on the first $1,000 of dividend income, which is a saving to the investor of $300 in taxation. The anomaly of taxing company profits twice, first through company tax and then as income in the hands of the shareholder, has been highlighted in the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System and in earlier inquiries. In terms of equity, such double taxation cannot be removed entirely as the practical effect of doing that would leave some fairly affluent people paying no tax at all.

1214 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

The Government, to its great credit, has recognised that the small investor is getting no encouragement to put his savings into Australian enterprises as opposed to real estate. It has for a long time been of concern to me that the average wage earner has thought of the stock market only in terms of speculative capital gain and not as a means of steady income support. There is, of course, a place for some speculation in helping to finance the work of oil and mineral exploration, but for the health of our economy it is essential that more small investors should have a stake in major national enterprises and prosper with them.
Some would say that tax exemption for the first $1,000 of dividend income is not much, but this, nevertheless, ranks as a vital first step. For the first time the small investor has his foot in the
door because a Liberal government is acting according to essential Liberal principles. Many of those who will benefit from the rebate are age pensioners. As a society, we must encourage people to provide for their own retirement if we want to avoid a massive burden on taxpayers in
years to come. This reform is a part of such a process whereby many people with quite modest incomes might now begin to build up investment portfolios which, by the time of retirement, could return a worthwhile supplement to normal superannuation, thus reducing their need for direct income support through the age pension.
This leads me to the well publicised aspect of the Budget, that is, the assistance it gives to the elderly. Those of us who try to listen carefully to our electors have realised for some time that the concern of many retired people is not so much the level of the pension, now that the Fraser Government's policy of indexation has been operating for
some time, but rather the amount of other income they could receive before losing fringe benefits or paying tax. The rise in the other income limit, the raising of the tax threshold, and the pensioner's tax rebate will all help to lessen these anxieties. Of particular concern have been the modest, fixed
superannuation payments that could actually disadvantage some age pensioners. The effect of these reforms will be to allow pensioners a total income of some $7,000 before tax is payable, to which we can add a further $1,000 if such income is obtained from dividends. This will enable a pensioner couple to receive $90 per week in other income before losing fringe benefits. In brief, we can applaud the incentive given to elderly people to retain private income.
Of the many changes in the social security policy and payments I would like to single out the new proposal for a family income supplement for the low income family which does not receive

social security assistance. I am convinced that such families very often live in rural electorates and that they have found themselves in increasing difficulty in recent years. When this scheme becomes operative next year that extra $10 per dependent child will ~ertainly help these family budgets. Taking a longer view, I consider that we have to get to grips with a fairer division of welfare expenditure. Whilst I am glad that the major spending increases in the social security area are geared towards the family, I cannot rest entirely easily with the fact that the effective increase in total spending for the Department of Social Security has risen some 15.4 per cent to 28.2 per cent of total Budget outlays. On both sides of the House we need to look at ways whereby some proportion of family allowances is directed away from the more affluent to those in need. This is a lot harder than it sounds. For a major saving we would need to place the income test at average weekly earnings which would hardly be a popular measure. Nevertheless, it would seem that some kind of carefully graduated income test must one day be used if we want to assist the low income family without adding to the tax burden and wrecking the economy.
I stand firmly behind the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) in his contention that any attack on poverty must not be made in the universal manner of increasing benefits right across the board, which is the essence of slothful, bureaucratic socialism. In calling for selective welfare to tackle what is being perceived as a growing problem, I do not see why the advocates of such a solution need be confined to the non-Labor side of politics. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) just instanced that type of approach in his speech. Selective welfare should appeal to anyone looking for a fairer means to relieve poverty. In the last few years, reality has dawned on the Liberal Party at the grass roots level that universal welfare can result only in national bankruptcy. Such reality may not, as yet, have caught up with the ALP. Certainly the Family Income Supplement Scheme, whatever its teething problems may be, has the virtue of trying to reach a special area of need on a selective basis.
As the representative of a rural electorate I appreciate the feeling that there is no special good news for the farm sector in this Budget other than the wiping off of the beef producers' debt for the brucellosis eradication campaign. Nonetheless, farmers are also taxpayers, family people and investors and their position can hardly be viewed in isolation. Total Budget outlays in the agricultural sector of $31 Om show an increase of some 40 per

Appropriation Bill (No. J) J982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1215

cent on the last financial year. I am also very confident that should the drought worsen on a national basis, as it is in the process of doing, unfortunately, the Federal Government has demonstrated that it stands ready to respond. The response it has given is very humane and justified. Furthermore, the farm sector remains hopeful that the Government will resist added protection demands which weaken our competitive position on overseas markets. I have some reservations as to the operation of the Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme on the grounds that it may involve cumbersome paper work without any great saving to the taxpayer. I also note comments by the fishing industry that such large users of diesel fuel would be carrying a major additional cost while awaiting the rebate. If indeed the new scheme proves unsatisfactory I would hope that speedy alterations might be made.
The increase in the retention allowance for private companies from 70 per cent to 80 per cent is welcome news for the small business sector and continues the process begun by this Government three years ago when the allowance was raised from 50 per cent. I am hopeful that small business will benefit from increased consumer spending that will more than offset the rise in sales tax and excise. One group of small businessmen in my electorate of Forrest who perhaps have cause to be satisfied with this Budget are the wine growers who have avoided the introduction of a wine excise. I am delighted that the Fraser Government has again shown the foresight to avoid such an imposition on an industry that is largely still establishing itself-that is, within the electorate of Forrest. It has been demonstrated in the south west of Western Australia that we can grow wines equal to those produced in any part of Australia, indeed the world. But it is still a fledgling industry in my electorate.
Finally, both as the member for an electorate where tourism is a major industry and as Chairman of the Government Members' Committee on Tourism I welcome the continuing support for the tourist industry by this Government. Not only has a record $9.7m been allocated for overseas promotion by the Australian Tourist Commission but the industry incentive package of last month extended a depreciation allowance of 2t per cent to all buildings in the tourist industry. This continues the initial advance made three years ago when the allowance was granted for accommodation buildings. In the same package the Export Market Development Grants Scheme was amended to raise the maximum grant to tourist operators to $200,000, to waive the minimum spending requirements of $5,000 and to extend eligibility.

The fact that tourism is no longer the poor relation of more favoured industries is a sign that in this field, as in many others, the Fraser Government is keeping well up front with reality.
The Government has set the scene. The Government continues to give this country sound, honest management. Basically the future is in our own hands. It it up to us, every member of society, as to how much he or she is prepared to contribute as against how much he or she wishes to take out. I believe it would require very little effort on everyone's behalf to turn our economy into a vibrant, healthy, fully employed economy with a secure future for all of us.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (9.43)-1 am pleased to join the debate on Appropriation Bill (No. I) which forms the major thrust of the Government's Budget presented to the Parliament three weeks ago. The 1982 Budget is a reversal of recent previous Budgets in that it proposes to loosen the tight monetary rein for politically expedient reasons in an attempt to give the Government the advantage in the forthcoming election. But the Australian people have been down this road before. They have experienced similar deceptions in the 1977 Budget which was brought down only months before an election was called. The Government offered tax cuts, it maintained tax indexation and offered a range of goodies. These supposedly responsible economic managers estimated that the cost of all those Budget measures would lead to a Budget deficit of only $1.4 billion. Three months later the Government went to the polls and won. Almost immediately after it became apparent that the Budget had blown out. The deficit was heading towards $2.5 billion. The Government had given the electorate the goods before the election but had wrongly calculated the costs.
In the 1978 Budget the Government took back its tax concessions, it backed down on its promised full tax indexation and it introduced the oil levy so that in one year the Government's revenue from oil and liquefied petroleum gas jumped from $800m to $1.3 billion. Medibank was dismantled and health insurance became more expensive, excise taxes were increased and there were further increases in sales tax and other indirect taxes. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) estimated that these measures put an extra 2 per cent on our inflation figure each year. People were told to tighten their belts, that life was not going to be easy. They experienced further deception in 1980 when the Government fabricated the resources boom. Suddenly they were told that Australia was once again the lucky country and that all Australians could expect to

1216 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

share the benefits of exceptional growth and national development. But the resources boom collapsed soon after the 1980 elections. Many big projects were either shelved or cancelled, for example, the Rundle shale oil project, the Alcan, Lochinvar and Portland aluminium smelters and the now ironic proposal to expand the Newcastle steel works.
The Australian people are awake to the Fraser Government's not having a sound economic framework as the basis for its policy decisions. They are awake to the reality of the Government's lurching from one election to the next, trying to bring down the policies which may get it re-elected but which will not get Australia out of its chronic economic malaise. I think the Australian people are awake to the fact that the Budget now before Parliament is another cynical exercise in political expediency.
The scenario for this situation was devised some months ago. First, we saw the Government introduce some incentives for the business community by way of increased depreciation allowances and plant investment allowances, et cetera, prior to the Budget so that maximum publicity could be obtained for those measures. I shall deal with these measures a little later. Secondly, we have the present Budget which provides, on the face of it, a basketful of goodies for the middle income earner, the swinging voter and some relief for our pensioner population. It is a Budget designed for an early election because of the handouts it proposes and because it lacks any provision for a reversal of the present poor economic condition of our country. It is a Budget which will do nothing to get the economy moving again. By the admission of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) we will have virtually no real growth and increased unemployment. It is a hotch-potch recipe for economic
disaster for Australia in the long term.
As the Leader of the Opposition has stated, in this Budget the Government has again used rubbery and downright deceptive figures. By understating expenditure and overstating income the Government is attempting to show that the deficit will be only $1,674m. This is an act of downright deception which will be seen by the community in its true light at the end of this financial year. That is another reason why the Government is so eager to have an election. It could then do what it did in 1978 after the election in 1977-take back the tax cuts six months after they were given. Even the so-called basket of goodies is deceptive. Three major problems facing my constituents in the electorate of Banks-and I am sure facing most Australians-have, according to the Treasurer, been addressed in this Budget. They are taxation,

housing and unemployment. A closer look at the Government's Budget measures shows that the basket of goodies has a false bottom or does not address the real problem.
First, I will deal with the tax measures. What are these tax measures? The Government has said that from November 1982 it will increase the tax threshold from $4,195 to $4,595 and the 46c tax threshold from $17,894 to $19,500. As well, the 32c in the dollar tax scale will be reduced to 30c. Accompanying these changes indirect taxes will be increased. On the face of it the measures, excluding the indirect tax increases, seem favourable. For a long time the Australian Labor Party has been urging the Government to grant some compensation. In context, however, the Government offers very little to most Australians. I have two major areas of complaint. First, the measures offer only little more than what full indexation would have given them. Secondly, it offers only a small reversal of the seven years of a regressive tax system.
On the first point, the tax concessions announced with such grandiosity in reality amount to only a little over what the taxpayer would have been entitled to under promised automatic tax indexation. The cost of the concessions in 1982-83 is estimated to be $1.6 billion, whereas the cost of full indexation is $1.5 billion. The Liberal Party praised the merits of tax indexation in 1975 when it promised to reform the tax system. Tax indexation it said would make government more honest with taxpayers' money because government would no longer be able to rely on the secret tax increase of inflation. These words were spoken by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in 1975. Yet over the proceeding years that commitment was rarely met. For the six financial years from 1976-77 to 1981-82 inclusive full tax indexation was applied only twice. In three of the remaining years half tax indexation was applied and in 1979-80 there was no tax indexation at all. Seen in this context, this Budget's tax concessions do not give much to the taxpayer; they simply stop the practice of automatically taking the hidden tax increases that inflation permits. I seek leave to have a table showing benefits of the Budget measures incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
BENEFITS TO THE TYPICAL") FAMILY AS A RESULT OF THE 1982-83 BUDGET MEASURES

$ per week

Tax in 1982-83 with full tax indexation Actual tax in 1982-83
Real tax cut

49.20 47.17
2.03

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1217

Plus: Home interest rebate Family allowance
Balance . . . . . Less: Indirect taxes
Decrease in health rebatelb)

$ per week
3.38 2.85 8.26 4.40 1b)30

mentioned in association with the other budgetary
measures, the typical family of four with one income earner earning $300 per week and a $25,000 mortgage is only $3.56 per week better off this
financial year. If this family did not qualify for the housing rebate or rented its accommodation it would be only 18c a week better off.

Net position

3.56 My second criticism of the tax measures is that

(a) The 'typical' family comprises a sole breadwinner with a dependent spouse and two dependent children with an income in 1982-83 of $300 per week and a $25,000 mortgage at 13.5%.

they do little to offset the Government's previous tax policies which have put an increased tax burden on the lower income earners but have
decreased the tax burden on the higher income

(b) As a result of the reduction in the basic tax rate from 32c to 30e, the health rebate will decline. The amount was de-
rived by using insurance rates for medibank private and assuming that the standard tax rate of 30c in the dollar will

earners. I have had prepared a second table which
shows the extent of this regression. I seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard.

apply for the whole year.

Leave granted.

Mr MOUNTFORD-I thank the House. When one takes into account the factor I have

The table read as follows-

Table 3

THE CHANGING TAX BURDEN

Net tax as proportion of income(%) Family type/income (a)

1975-76

1981-82

1982-83

Per cent change in net tax as proportion of income

1975-76 to 1981-82

1975-76 to 1982-83

$
12,062 12,370 (average wage) 18,652 (AWE) 36,187 72,374
12,062 12,370 18,652 36,187 72,374
12,062 12,370 18,652 36,187 72,374
18,652 36,187
18,652 36,187

Single taxpayer

16.1

19.5

19.3

17.9

19.8

19.6

22.8

23.9

23.5

34.1

34.1

34.3

48.0

46.3

47.1

Taxpayer and dependent spouse

9.1

11.8

12.4

11.5

12.3

12.8

18.3

19.0

19.0

31.8

31.5

32.0

46.8

45.0

46.0

Taxpayer, dependent spouse and 2 children

1.6

7.7

6.4

4.8

8.3

7.0

13.4

16.3

15.1

29.3

30.2

30.0

45.6

44.3

45.0

Two income family with 2 children (b)

7.6

13.0

12.8

20.8

23.9

23.6

Two income family, no dependants (b)

12.4

15.7

15.9

23.3

25.3

25.3

21.1 10.6 4.8
-3.5
29.7 7.0 3.8 -1.0 -3.8
381.3 72.9 21.6 3.1 -2.9
71.1 14.9
26.6 8.6

19.8 9.4 3.0 0.8 -1.8
36.2 11.3 3.8 0.6 -1.7
300.0 45.8 12.6
2.3 -1.3
68.4 13.4
28.2 8.6

(a) Income is expressed in 1982-83 dollars. These income levels were deflated by AWE to find net tax as proportion of income for a person on an equivalent real income in 1975-76 (this approach takes account of changes in both inflation and real earnings).
(b) The income level is total combined family income. It has been assumed that the primary income earner earns twice as much as the secondary income earner.

1218 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

Mr MOUNTFORD-I thank the House. Over the past seven years the lower the income of a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children, as shown in the table, the greater proportion of his income he has had to pay in tax. For example, a person who now earns $12,062 pays 6.4 per cent of his income in tax. In 1975-76 he paid 1.6 per cent. The proportion has increased in this period by 300 per cent. I compare this with a person earning $36,187. He now pays 30 per cent of his income in tax. In 1975-76 he paid 29.3 per cent.
The increase is only 2.3 per cent. It is only when we get into even higher income groups that that percentage has decreased. We now see that when
the Prime Minister said in the 1975 election campaign that his Government would reduce the tax burden he must have meant that the burden would be reduced for only a very select group of taxpayers, that is, the richer ones.
So much for the Budget's tax cuts. What about the housing measures? The Government has said that this Budget addresses the housing problem. I dispute this claim for several reasons. First, what is the housing problem? There are three main groups in our community who are experiencing a housing problem. Firstly, there are those people who are in the private rental market and are unlikely ever to be in a position of purchasing their own homes. This is the long term housing problem which faces the lower income groups in society. Secondly, there are those people who are in the private rental market and who are likely to be able to afford their own homes. These are the people currently faced with the deposit gap. Thirdly, there are those people who have already committed themselves to the purchase of houses but who are currently experiencing cash flow problems as a result of rising interest rates. This group, comprising primarily middle income earners, is in need of short term assistance.
What has the Government done for the first group? All the Budget does for this group, which makes up 25 per cent of the population, is to allocate $IOm in rent relief assistance. This compares with the $562m package to home purchasers who represent approximately 25 per cent of the Australian population. The Government has also increased supplemenatary assistance to pensioners in rented accommodation but by a mere $2 a week. Rentals are rising at an annual rate of more than $10 a week. If the Government were serious in alleviating the housing problem for this group it would extend considerably the access to public rental housing. The Government-I give it credit for this-has increased the welfare housing share in this Budget but over the past eight years in real terms the money it has spent on welfare

housing has declined, in 1982-83 prices, from $975m in 1974-75 to $290m in 1982-83. The cumulative real reduction in public housing funding over that period is a staggering $3,740m.
The second group comprises those people who are unable to bridge the deposit gap, that is, the people who are eligible for the maximum home loan which is far exceeded by the cost of a home. Only two courses of action are open to a person in this position. Either he rents accommodation until he can save the deposit or he obtains a second mortgage. For the person who takes the first option this Budget offers little to no help. He will still be paying $90 to $100 a week in rent and if he has enough money to save he will pay tax on the interest his savings earn. The person who takes the second option will receive some assistance through the interest rebate, which I will deal with later. But his more basic problem, that of having to obtain a second mortgage, is not recognised at all. By tightening the money supply the Government is, in fact, making it harder for him to get finance.
The third group comprises the people who purchased houses recently and are now finding it difficult to cope with interest rate rises. Many people within my electorate are experiencing such a problem. In recent years several new subdivisions have been opened up to home buyers in the Milperra, Padstow Heights and Lugarno areas. Those who thought they could afford to buy homes in early 1980 have had to evaluate their positions. Since then savings banks' interest rates have risen from 9.5 per cent to 13.5 per cent. This 4 per cent increase has meant that repayments on a $30,000 loan have risen from $262 a month to $350 a month-an annual increase of $1,056. Many home owners are struggling to maintain their mortgages. Statistics on mortgage defaults from the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation show
that between 1970-71 and 1979-80 mortgage defaults have increased from 4 per cent of total premiums to 35 per cent. The people in this group get perhaps the most benefit from this Budget-a rebate of 30c in the dollar on interest payments above a rate of IO per cent on loans up to $60,000 no matter what their incomes or the sources of their loans. But whilst the measure is welcome, it goes only a fraction of the way to reducing the $1,056 in extra repayments that a person who purchased a home in 1980 with a loan of $30,000 is enduring. Under the March scheme the maximum rebate he could anticipate was $300 this year. Under the Budget rebate scheme this amount will be $377.50. The measure also assists home buyers who may not be in need of government assistance at all. Over half of the estimated

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1982-83

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1219

cost of the interest rebate will go to home buyers with incomes in excess of 150 per cent of average weekly earnings.
In the short time. I have left in this debate I want to say something about what this Budget offers for the unemployed. There has been a very real deterioration of the employment market in this country. In July this year there was no employment growth. The unemployment rate was

6.6 per cent. It is expected to top 10 per cent in February 1983. In my electorate of Banks many firms are literally going to the wall. I have prepared a table showing some of these companies which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

TABLE OF RECENT RETRENCHMENTS IN BANKS ELECTORATE (as recorded at Revesby C.E.S. Office)

Company

Date of

Number

Retrenchments Retrenched Positions Retrenched

Bliss Welded Products
Byrne & Davidson Manufacturing James N. Kirby
Betts Motors Comeng Engineering Email
Sebels Hyster
Hawker De Haviland

28/5/82
January-June July january-july
january-july 30/6/82 10/8/82 (Effective 17/12/82)
27/8/82 19/4/82 (Effective September
82)
31/5/82

20 Tradesmen Fitters, Machinists & Trades Assistants
22 Process Workers (48) 28 Electrician (I) & Storeman (I) 335 Staff, Production/Process Workers
and Apprentices (59) 256 Production/Process Workers
8 Production Workers 313 Staff & Production Workers. Full
range involved with Closure. 40 Production Workers
200 Staff, Tradesmen & Production Workers.
37 Sheetmetal Workers, Engine Fitter & Process Workers.

Mr MOUNTFORD-I thank the House. As this table shows, retrenchments have grown dramatically this year in my electorate, hitting not just young apprentices but also middle aged bread winners who sometimes have been with a company for many years. The list I have given is by no means absolute. It records only significant retrenchments by major employers. The number of small scale retrenchments is not known, but, according to the manager of the local Commonwealth Employment Service at Revesby, it is very considerable. Jobs are being eradicated from industry, not temporarily, but on a permanent basis. We will not get them back.
What is the Fraser Government doing about it? Firstly, it announced with much bravado an investment package for industry. The package, according to the Treasurer, will assist industry with investment and will thereby retain jobs and increase employment. I contend that it will do the opposite. The package, in fact, will encourage industry to invest in capital intensive, not labour intensive, measures. Clearly, the Government has not even read its own commissioned report on technological change. This report clearly indicates the transformation of industry from labour intensive investment to capital intensive investment. The Government's package simply speeds up this process. Let me add that I concede that the

new technologies may be necessary if Australian industry is to remain competitive. In fact I believe the Government is not doing enough to encourage research and development of our own technology or to back our local inventions with venture capital.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (10.0)- Secondly, the Government delivers a Budget which has a no-growth strategy as its basis. By budgeting for a $240m domestic surplus the Government is taking money out of the pockets of wage and salary earners and out of the profits of firms facing severe liquidity and investment problems. The foreign deficit does nothing to generate

1220 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Adjournment

jobs in Australia. By restricting the growth in the money supply to 9 per cent to II per cent, just enough to accommodate the expected inflation rate of 10.75 per cent, it provides no capacity for growth. To hold unemployment at its present level we must achieve an annual growth of at least 3 per cent. This means aiming at a domestic deficit and an increase in the money supply-the reverse of the Fraser Government's policies.
Thirdly, the Government says that it is increasing its manpower training programs by 2I per cent for 1982-83. On the face of it, it is a welcome increase but when seen in the context of the overalI Budget, which forecasts no employment growth in 1982-83, it is ludicrous. The Government can talk all it likes about grandiose schemes to retrain the unemployed, but the reality is that the jobs are not there even when they gain the skilIs. Fourthly, and it is hardly worth mentioning, the Government has increased the unemployment benefits in the Budget. The increase of $4 a week in benefits for the under-18-year-olds represents an II per cent increase in seven years. For those unemployed who are over 18 years their benefit of $64.40 is stilI $26.70 below the poverty line. These measures are a total insult to those unemployed because of the Government's own economic policies.
In conclusion, let me say that I am disappointed with the Government's strategies in managing the Australian economy. Where we should have seen increasing productivity and employment, we have instead seen low growth and increasing unemployment. The Government has blindly folIowed the United States of America and the United Kingdom down the Friedman economic path of recession and depresson. The world is now on the brink of economic depression because the major countries of the West have pursued wrong policies-policies that were based on political expediency. In Australia we need a government of vision, a government that has faith in the future, a government that is willing to forgo short term, stop-go policies of expediency in favour of long term economic stability which wilI improve our people's standard of living. We need a leader who wilI unite our people in a true nationalistic spirit.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bradfield) adjourned.

ADJOURNMENT
Benefits for Vietnam Veterans-Ronald Biggs: Appearance in Advertisement-Retirement Village in Towradgi: Proposed Leisure Development-Tertiary Students: Unemployment Benefit-Kakadu National
Park: Uranium Mining-Tariffs: Agricultural Equipment Manufacturers
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (10.4)-1 draw to the attention of the House a Press statement issued by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) on 27 August 1982 in which he indicated the Government's support for the proposition of greater uniformity in liability in repatriation legislation. He indicated that it was the Government's intention that repatriation legislation be amended to provide greater uniformity in Commonwealth liability to provide benefits to veterans and their dependants. He specificalIy indicated that the proposed amendment was designed to remove existing anomalies within the legislation which deprived veterans, particularly those who had taken part in the Vietnam war, of entitlements equivalent to those for those veterans who had fought in earlier conflicts on behalf of this nation. Of course, that was basicalIy an endorsement of the policies and of the views which had been argued for and on behalf of the Opposition in this House in April of this year. Not being one who would ever want to look a gift horse in the mouth and not wanting to be churlish about this matter, 1 would have been perfectly happy to compliment the Minister and the Government on this much needed amendment had it not been for what seemed to me to be an exercise in politicking by the Minister at the end of his Press statement. 1 rather suspect that he said what he did at the end of the statement out of a feeling of guilt. He said:
The Government has needed no prodding on this issue and it is significant that the legislation changes it proposes are broader than those proposed by other parties.
To say that the Government needed no prodding on this issue is, I suggest, an indication of the guilty mind of the Minister. In March of this year there was before this House a Repatriation Amendment BilI. An amendment was moved on that occasion by my colIeague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) which was seconded by me. That amendment contemplated the very amendment which is now contemplated by the Minister. On that occasion the Minister handling the BilI on behalf of the Government in this House indicated that the Government could not accept that amendment. A division was calIed

Adjournment

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1221

and every honourable member on the Government side of the House followed the view expressed by the Government and cast his or her vote against any changes in the legislation. I indicated that I thought this was the kind of amendment which should have attracted support from both sides of the House and I urged the Government to examine what seemed to me to be the justice of that claim while the legislation passed between this place and the Senate.
The Bill was debated in the Senate in April 1982 and the very same amendment was moved in the Senate. On that occasion Government supporters again used their numbers to reject any such proposal. Some four months later the Government has suddenly changed its mind on the very issue which its members were not prepared to consider appropriate or just in March or April of this year. Yet the Minister says: 'We did not need any prodding'. What caused this change was the decision of the Vietnam Veterans Association to campaign in marginal seats for what was plain justice. I commend it for its actions and decision. I salute the result it has already achieved for its members from its action. I can only hope that the Minister, having conceded the justice of this occasion, will now consider the claim for further justice and grant these people the judicial inquiry they have sought for so long.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (1O.8)-On 26 March 1964 a British court in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, convicted 10 men for their involvement in the £2.5m 1963 British mail train robbery. They were sentenced by Mr Justice Edmund Davies on 16 April of that year to prison terms ranging up to 30 years. Explaining the severity of the sentences Davies said to those he was sentencing:
Potential criminals . . . dazzled by the size . . . of the prize must be taught that punishment will be proportionately greater; let us clear any romantic notions . . . it is . . . a sordid crime of violence inspired by vast greed . . . it would be an affront if you were at liberty in the near future to enjoy these ill-gotten gains.
Those convicted included Ronald Arthur Biggs, then 34 years, a carpenter. Biggs, a member of the gang that executed that robbery, escaped from Wandsworth prison in London on 8 July 1966 with three other prisoners. Of course, we know the record of his activities in Australia where he lived for some time under an alias. We know that the police suspect Biggs of having been involved in robberies in Australia. We know that he fled Australia leaving his wife and family to fend for themselves. We know of his history in the West Indies and in South America. We know that he fathered a child to a Brazilian woman so that he

could remain in Brazil and we know that the many attempts that were made by the British authorities to have him extradited to Great Britain have failed.
In recent days we have seen in newspapers in Australia the same Ronald Arthur Biggs advertising a particular brand of coffee. The Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations refused to accept the commercials that featured Ronald Biggs selling that coffee, but unfortunately full page advertisements have been run in some newspapers suggesting that people buy the brand of coffee Cafe de Rio. I just hope that when people take notice of that advertisement and think that it is very clever-obviously it was a good idea on the part of the advertising agencythey will remember that the guard on that train lost his life to make Biggs notorious to an extent that he could be hired by an Australian advertising agency, no doubt at very great cost, to make this commercial.
We know that Ronald Biggs has featured in Press advertisements and television advertisements which were never shown. The latest estimate that I can gain on what he may have been paid to undertake this promotion was in excess of $A35,000. I believe that the advertising agency should be condemned and that the manufacturers of that brand of coffee should also be condemned for even considering having this man involved in the promotion of their product. I make a plea to the people of Australia: The next time they are in a supermarket and see the coffee brand Cafe de Rio, avoid it like the plague.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (10.12)- Tonight the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) announced the grants for aged persons homes and homes for handicapped people. I have been very pleased to obtain a grant of $268,168 for the establishment of a retirement village in my electorate for the IIlawarra Retirement Trust at Towradgi which is a community north of Wollongong. The point I make about this grant is that the Towradgi village is in a state of turmoil at the moment because an application has been lodged with the Council of the City of Wollongong for the development of a leisure centre next door to this aged persons village. The leisure centre is to be an enormous multi-million dollar complex that will include a great variety of facilities such as a miniature train that will traverse the multi-acre site, canals, lakes and bumper boats, six large water slides, places for electronic games, a flea market, barbeques and a rock concert facility that will accommodate 3,000 people. I have received personally representations from over 180 residents of this viIlage, upon which the Commonwealth has

1222 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Adjournment

already spent some $735,000 and upon which it is

now proposed bringing total

tCoosmpmenodnwaneaaltdhditeixopneanldi$t2u6r8~00to0

over $lm.

1 have made a request of the Minister for Social Security that he have regard for the welfare of the residents of this aged persons village and, indeed, for the taxpayers of this country who have invested in excess of $lm in it, by demonstrating his interest in this leisure centre proposal. The res~dents contend that the peace and tranquility whICh they seek in their retirement and their old
age is now to be put at risk. One can imagine the effect of a rock concert attended by 3,000 people. Inadquate parking facilities are proposed which will result in a great spillover into the areas surrounding the retirement village.

1 have asked the Minister to institute inquiries

to ascertain whether the complaints of the resi-

dents are justified. That is all 1 have asked. 1 have

received a response from his secretary-I deplore

and disparage the practice of a secretary sending a

response to any member of Parliament-who told

me that the matter is not one for the concern of

his Minister but is one for the Minister for Plan-

ning and Environment in New South Wales. 1

refuse to believe that this Federal Minister is so ir-

responsible or so discourteous as to fail to take an

interest on the one hand and to fail to respond to

me on the other hand. 1 call on him to disregard

the advice that has come from his Department

and the decision that has been taken by his staff

and some of his advisers that he can wash his

hands of this matter. 1 think he should become

actively involved by way of instituting an inquiry

to ascertain whether the peace and tranquility of

the residents of this village are at risk in any way.

Of course, if there is a prima facie case to that

effect, the Commonwealth would have an appro-

priate role in opposing the application when it

comes before the Council of the City of Wollon-

gong and, if necessary, joining the residents in a

legal action to oppose the application and cause

them to be underwritten by the resources of the

Attorney-General's Department. 1 think it would

be stupid for the Commonwealth to spend over

$1 m on a retirement village into which people are

enticed to enjoy peace and tranquility for the rest

of their lives and then to sit idly by while the

whole thing is sabotaged and undermined through

the Commonwealth's indifference. The Common-

wealth indeed,

should honour

safeguard its investment its obligation to this very

laanrgd~

number of senior citizens.

Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (10.17)-1 desire to raise a matter which has caused me quite some

concern and on which 1have had a number of representations. The alert and the observant will have already noted that 1 have asked a question
on this matter. Student benefit guidelines propose that no unemployment benefit payments will be made to tertiary students during university and college recess. Those guidelines contemplate a recess of two or at the most three months. 1 agree with that general principle, although I recognise that there can be difficulties.
I wish to raise particularly the case of Griffith University. We have a situation there that 1 believe is most unfortunate. The Griffith University is very close to the Commonwealth Games Com-
plex. The campus and the buildings are being appropriated for the purposes of the Commonwealth Games. For that reason the educational year started early at Griffith and it will end this month, September. 1 believe that there will be no resumption at that university until the end of
February; so the recess will last for about five months. This poses a very great difficulty for those students who are not able to get the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance. Vacation jobs are very difficult to obtain. The observation of the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security (Mr Wilson) this morning that the longer recess will provide an opportunity for students to obtain vacation jobs to supplement their incomes and to gain experience is fine but it is not realistic because jobs are just not easy to obtain, particularly in the electorate which 1 represent. If they were easy to obtain, 1 would have no complaint and I would not be raising this matter in the House tonight. In the cases that have come to my notice, the parents' resources are severely strained. Indeed, the students who have spoken to me feel very poorly about putting so much of a strain on their parents for so long a time. Students continuing their studies are in a position that I believe was not comprehended when the guidelines were set. Such a long period of recess was not envisaged. This is not the fault of the students. The action was taken to hold the Commonwealth Games and the Commonwealth Government has supported requests for assistance from the State Government and the Brisbane City Council. We have given that help. But continuing students, through no fault of their own, are having their semesters altered and their recess elongated. They face a serious problem. They are like the ham in the sandwich. I appeal to the Minister to look very closely at the problem which has arisen to see whether there is any element of injustice and whether there are grounds for considering a variation of the guidelines for the continuing students

Adjournment

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1223

at Griffith University. This year they have a long recess and will be in a once only position of being unable to get vacation jobs. The difficulties are serious.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (1O.20)-Five weeks ago my wife and I spent a few days in Kakadu National Park.
Mr Les Johnson-How did it go?
Dr THEOPHANOUS-It was very interesting, as the honourable member will hear in a moment. We were interested to look at several of the issues involved there: Firstly, the situation of the Aboriginal people; secondly, the effect of uranium mining on the area; and thirdly, what was actually happening to the park. There is a conflict of interests in that area. From my observations and from discussions I had with, for example, the rangers in the park, Aboriginal people, and the people involved in uranium mining I believe that this conflict will become more accentuated in the future. There seem to be so many different concepts of the future of that area and what will happen to it. I wish to deal firstly with the proposed uranium mines at Jabiluka and Koongarra, which are massive projects. One of those projects has been approved by the Northern Territory Government. That approval was obtained after supposed extensive discussions with the Aboriginal people in the area. In my discussions with them. I found that tactics of intimidation and attempted bribery had been used over those people to attempt to force them into a position where they finally gave way to the demands from the companies involved in uranium mining at Jabiluka.
It is interesting to contrast that situation with the situation in an area further south but still in the park-the Koongarra mine. The Aboriginal people there, organised by the Gagudju Association, have rejected the proposals for uranium mining in the area and in rejecting those proposals they have created a crisis for the Northern Territory Government. To this stage the Northern Territory Government has been able to use one technique or another to force the Aboriginal people to accept these kinds of mining leases. Some of the reasons why the Aboriginal people rejected the Koongarra mine apply to all of the mines in that area. In fact, some of those reasons apply to the problems faced in the whole park area. The first and major reason is that the Koongarra mine is close to a major sacred site, the home of the lightning god of the Aboriginal people in the area. Given that situation, they are understandably very reluctant to allow mining in that place. If one visits that area one finds that is an absolutely

beautiful part of Australia that would be totally ruined by a uranium mine, especially when one takes into account the weather conditions that exist and the roads and other works that would have to be built.
Already in the middle of the Kakadu Park is a town called Jabiru and it is anticipated that in the next six months to 12 months Jabiru will have a population of 1000. It is a quite extraordinary contradiction to drive through a park which has Aboriginal settlements and so forth and suddenly to come upon this town, which is like a suburban shopping centre in the middle of a city such as Sydney or Melbourne. It is such a total contradiction and it is so out of place in that area. If the uranium mines go ahead, it is intended that the town will have-these are not my words but the words of the people at the Ranger mine-a population of 10,000 people; that is to say, more than 10 times the total Aboriginal population of the area.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.25)-This morning I questioned the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) on a matter of great concern to me and to the people of my electorate. I refer to our tariff laws and a situation of a tariff in reverse. The Phillips tractor company of Merredin is situated in a town approximately halfway between Perth and Kalgoorlie, 260 kilometres from Perth. It is central to the eastern wheat belt of Western Australia and has a population of approximately 4,000 people. It is a relatively large town in Western Australian terms. Laurie Phillips, who has been a resident there for many years, commenced manufacturing four wheel drive agricultural tractors in 1975. His decision to choose the town of Merredin could be justified only by its proximity to the customers. As a present day employer of 50 people, Mr Phillips stands as my ideal of an operater of a successful and decentralised business. He is taking advantage of the position but, more importantly, he is creating work for people who choose not to work in city areas but wish to gain some of the benefits provided by country living. His production over the first five years averaged 13 tractors a year. This was caused more by his lack of working capital than by a lack of orders. He just manufactured to order, factory direct, as he could neither afford stock on hand nor agent's commission.
In 1980 Mr Phillips took a partner and appointed agents both in Western Australia and

1224 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Adjournment

interstate. These moves saw sales rise to 47 tractors in 1981 and to a predicted 70 tractors in 1982. His range of tractors has also increased and now varies from a 249 horsepower, four wheel drive, manual drive machine at a price of about $70,000 to a SIS horsepower, power shift model at $251,000. Laurie has tended to keep ahead of imported tractors both in horsepower and in equipment such as power shift. I can tell honourable members that, from observing his tractors myself, they are advanced models which are at-
tractive to the farming community in this day and age of big equipment. Nevertheless, it is natural with such a small volume producer that Phillips utilise imported mechanical components such as Mercedes engines and Japanese transmissions and axles. The success of his combination is evident from the fact that the first machine sold is still in active service although the purchaser now owns a second machine. That gentleman has resisted all
overtures to sell the original machine back to the Phillips company.
There is a problem. The Federal revenue duty of 2 per cent is applicable to all his imported components. This represents a cost of $600 to $900 a tractor and, in terms of the Phillips production level, about $1,000 a week. Unfortunately for this small and viable four wheel drive tractor manufacturer his competitors, who are importing fully built up four wheel drive tractors from the United States of America in particular, do not pay this duty. In fact they pay no import duties at all. A General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade conference of the past, no doubt recognising that Australia had no manufacturers in this area, saw a duty-free deal in fully built up, four wheel drive tractors as a logical trade-off for concessions overseas in other trade areas. Mr Phillips is quite happy to meet head on and on equal terms the competition from the big time overseas competitors. However, because of this GATT agreement his competitors escape the 2 per cent revenue

duty. In addition, the percentage of imported components denies him access to the tractor bounty.
Only recently the Government announced that it would dispose of the 2 per cent revenue duty for ships manufactured overseas and imported into this country. I am therefore at a loss to know why for 18 months the Government has constantly advised me that there is no way in which a similar arrangement can be made for people in this manufacturing area. It is unbelievable that such a simple solution cannot be provided. In a highly protected nation such as ours we have a situation where some local manufactures are actually being hit by duty which is not applicable to imported components.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the House stands adjourned until I0 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to pro_vide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Mr N. A. Brown to present a Bill for an Act relating to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and for other purposes.
Mr N. A. Brown to present a Bill for an Act to enact certain transitional provisions and make certain amendments in consequence of the enactment of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1982.

Answers to Questions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1225 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Aboriginal Arts Board
(Question No. 4337)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Further to the answer to Senate question No. 1563 (Senate Hansard, 23 February 1982, pages 355-7), can he give a further breakdown of the budget of the Aboriginal Arts Board, in particular (a) the $893763 spent nationally and overseas, (b) the $256 135 spent in the Northern Territory and (c) the $56467 spent in Western Australia.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australia Council has provided the following information:
A breakdown of the budget of the Aboriginal Arts Board for 1980-81 is provided at pages 73 to 78 of the 1980-81 Annual Report of the Australia Council.
A further breakdown of the funds spent nationally, overseas, in the Northern Territory and in Western Australia is as follows:

ABORIGINAL ARTS BOARD Grants 1980-81

(a) National

Aboriginal Artists Agency Ltd-

Administration and operation expenses dur-

ing 1980-81

. . . ..

Aboriginal Arts and Crafts Pty LtdAdministration and operation expenses during 1980-81 for the marketing and promotion of Aboriginal arts and crafts

Administration and operation expenses July' to September 1981 for marketing and promotion

Aboriginal Cultural Foundation-

Administration and operation expenses dur-

ing 1980-81 for program of activities in

Northern Australia

. . . ..

Aboriginal Publications FoundationOperation expenses subsidy for Aboriginal publishing enterprise during 1980-81

Indigenous Peoples ConferenceToward expenses of cultural events at inter-
national conference in Canberra May 1981 . . . . . . .

Australian Aborigines WoomeraAdministration and production costs for cultural education program during 1980-81 . . . . . . .

Expenses for cultural presentation at Liverpool region arts conference

Operation costs for cultural education program July to December 1981'

Aboriginal/Islander Skills Development Scheme-
Subsidy for national Aboriginal dance training program during 1981 . . . . .

$ 60,000 300,000 75,000 194,000 80,000 10,000 46,350
431 15,450 39,000

Aboriginal Artists Agency LtdTravel and expenses for Aboriginal musicians to attend community festivals and concerts . . . . . . . . .
Children's Free EmbassyTowards costs of touring, concert and workshop program during 1980-81
Grant-in-aid of organisational trip to Northern Territory . . . . .
Toward costs of touring program to NSW and Northern Territory during 1981-82*
Expansion and Development ProgramFreight and costs associated with collection of Aboriginal artefacts for exhibition
Information Program-LiteraturePurchases of promotional material on Aboriginal art, craft and culture
Information Program-FilmPurchase of films on Aboriginal art, craft and culture for Board archives

17 Grants

Overseas Aboriginal Artists Agency Ltd-
Toward costs of tour to USA by Aboriginal
artists and performers in July 1981 - Australian Gallery Directors Council-
Expenses to continue tour of Oenpelli art exhibition in Europe

2 Grants

Total National/Overseas

(b) Northern Territory

Araluen Arts and Cultural Trust Subsidy

toward program costs of two arts resource

officers

......

Xavier Boys' School. Expenses for school cul-

tural education program on Bathurst Island

Kungkaku Community Council Inc. Subsidy

for purchase of a vehicle for cultural pur-

poses

. . . . . . . ..

Santa Teresa School. Towards costs of tour to

Papua New Guinea by senior students . .

Yirrkala Dhanbul Association Inc. Subsidy

toward costs of ceremonial activities

Yulngu Association Inc. Toward costs of

NADOC dance festival in Katherine, 1981

Northern Territory Country Music Festival.

Toward costs of staging Aboriginal Country

Music Festival at Warrabri, N.T. in August

1980 . . . . . . . . . . . .

Croker Island Arts & Crafts. Operation sub-

sidy for traditional craft program during

1980-81

Galiwinku Arts & Crafts. Operation subsidy

for traditional craft program during

1980-81

Maningrida Arts and Crafts. Production costs

for art and craft catalogue and development

costs for community museum

Milingimbi Arts and Crafts. Operation subsidy

for traditional craft program during

1980-81

$
5,000 10,500
250 10,500 2,035 2,630
512 851,658
30,000 12,105 42,105 893,763
2,500 800
2,000 1,300 1,200 3,000
2,839 3,000 25,500 13,000 25,000

1226 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Mimi Aboriginal Arts & Crafts. Subsidy for

operation of craft program during 1980-81;

Operation subsidy July to December 1981*

Papunya Tula Artists Pty Ltd. Operation sub-

sidy for traditional art program during

1980-81

Ramingining Arts & Crafts. Operating sub-

sidy for traditional art and craft program

during 1980-81

Tiwi Designs Bathurst Island. Salary and ex-

penses of adviser for screen painting work-

shop during 1980-81 . . . . . . .

Tiwi Pima Arts Bathurst Island. Operation

subsidy for traditional craft program during

1980-81

.........

Operation subsidy for traditional craft

program July to September 1981*

Tiwi Pottery Bathurst Island. Operation sub-

sidy during 1980-81;

Operation subsidy for July to September

1981* . . . . .

.....

Utopia Women's Artists Group. Toward costs

of batik making program at Utopia Station

Yirrkala Arts & Crafts. Operation subsidy for

traditional craft program during 1980-8 I

Yuendumu Museum Society. Fees for Abor-

iginal curators of the Men's and Women's

traditional museums during 1980-81

Bamyili School. Half costs of purchase of

offset printing machine for community bi-

lingual program . . . . . .

Maningrida Literature Production Centre.

Casual wages for literacy workers to record,

translate and print bilingual material

Papunya School Literature Centre. Part costs

for purchase of printing hardware

Central Australian Aboriginal Media Associ-

ation. Purchase of recording equipment for

Aboriginal radio broadcasts in Central

Australia

27 Grants

(c) Western Australia

Aboriginal Memorial Day-Perth. Airfare for

Aboriginal participant at Memorial Day in

Perth 1980

........ .

Middar Aboriginal Theatre. Adminstration

and operation costs for Aboriginal tra-

ditional dance group in Perth

Nyoongah Community Inc., Perth. Adminis-

tration and operation costs for community

cultural organisation during 1980-81

Subsidy for operation costs July to December

1981*

.......... .

Broome Arts Group Aboriginal Corporation.

Subsidy toward purchase of recording

equipment for Aboriginal community arts

group

Western Australia Country Music Festival.

Toward costs of staging 3rd Aboriginal

Country Music Festival in Perth during

1980-81 . . . . . . . . . . .

Western Australian Museum. Demonstration

of traditional crafts by Aboriginal artists .

Strelley Community School. Purchase of a

process camera for use in the bilingual

literature program

Purchase of software items for production of

bilingual material for use in bilingual litera-

ture program

$ 10,000 5,000 20,000 27,000 14,738 20,000 4,300 25,000 5,000 3,000 22,858 7,000 2,325
1,000 5,225
3,550 256,135
641 1,500 30,000 10,000
1,000
5,000 2,166 2,060 1,500

Radio 6NR Perth. Costs of production of Aboriginal radio programs

$ 2,600

10 Grants

56,467

* Includes provision of funds for expenditure in 1981-82.
Tenosynovitis and Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
(Question No. 4392)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3). No comprehensive medical examinations beyond those included in the appointment process are conducted routinely. Medical examinations are, however, arranged when officers or employees report symptoms of apparently job related illnesses.
The significance of repetition strain injury as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. My Department has reacted promptly in researching the problem and it is expected that a National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Occupational Health Guide will be issued in the near future. My Department and statutory authorities within my portfolio will make every effort, subject to the availability of resources, to comply with NHMRC recommendations.
My Department is continuing to consider this problem and to seek advice from relevant authorities on suitable working environments for operators where the possible existence of health hazards is suspected. Existing work places have, of course, been designed, fitted out and equipped having regard to recent Government and State safety regulations and relevant standards and guidelines issued by such bodies as the Standards Association of Australia, the NHMRC and the Department of Science and Technology.
In accordance with the Guidelines on Technological Change issued by the Public Service Board, my Department is consulting with staff associations regarding re-equipment programs in some of its major processing areas. The ergonomic aspects of equipment and work processes in the areas concerned are covered in those consultations.

Public Service: Video Display Unit Operators
(Question No. 4414)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction,
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having

Answers to Questions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1227

regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment'.
(b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr N. A. Brown-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 has been brought to the attention of all supervisors and operators in the Department. Copies of the memorandum have also been provided to the statutory authorities for which the Attorney General has responsibility; although it should be noted that some of those authorities have autonomous powers in relation to the matters in question. Operators in the Department, in consultation with supervisors, take regular breaks from operating this equipment to perform other tasks or to take basic rest periods.
(b) The percentage of the working day spent on operating duties depends on the nature of the task being performed and it is therefore difficult to give a precise answer. However, experience in the Department indicates that no operators spend more than 75% of their day on operating duties.
(c) (i) The general practice in the Department is for the output required of an operator to be determined by the nature and complexity of the task being performed and there is no requirement to complete a number of keystrokes within any specific time frame. Operators are expected to complete a reasonable number of keystrokes according to the task being undertaken. (ii) No statistics are maintained by the Department on keystrokes completed.
Public Service: Video Display Unit Operators
(Question No. 4418)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hours 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) operators have been made aware of the need for breaks by supervisors and/or by circulars and are permitted regular breaks from operating their equipment.
(b) The percentage of the working day occupied on operating duties varies considerably depending on the system utilised and work organisation. Where operators spend lOOper cent of their working time on operating duties they are allowed regular breaks additional to lunch and morning and afternoon

tea. In systems where operators spend a substantial proportion of their time on other duties the work arrangements themselves provide time away from equipment operating duties.
(c) The type of equipment and the processing system used influence the rates of output expected from operators. Operators who use screen based equipment for processing medical benefits and similar claims are expected to complete, on average, 48,750 keystrokes per 6t hour day (7,500 per hour). The 6t hour day is based on a 7 hour 21 minute day less morning and afternoon tea breaks and rest breaks. Actual keystrokes rates vary between approximately 7,500 per hour and 12,000 per hour. In a number of operational systems there is no requirement to complete a set number of keystrokes per day because of the nature of the work involved, for example, checking the information shown on a visual display unit.
Mr Frank Nugan
(Question No. 4452)
Mr Hayden asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
Is he able to say whether Frank Nugan at any time arranged or sought to arrange a private meeting with him or any of his Ministers through the Federal Liberal Party Director, Tony Eggleton, and Dr Guy Pauker.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I had no private meeting with Frank Nugan, nor do I recall any proposals to arrange for him to meet with me. Mr Eggleton advises that he has no knowledge of any proposals to arrange a meeting between Mr Nugan, myself or any Minister.
Report on the Health Needs of Adolescents
(Question No. 4485)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
When will the Minister announce the Government's support or rejection of the recommendations in the report on the health needs of adolescents.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The implementation of most of the recommendations in this discussion document falls within the responsibilities of the State and Territory Governments and health authorities and voluntary agencies.
The Capital Territory Health Commission agrees in principle with the recommendations of the report and, subject to constraints associated with current staffing and financial restrictions, supports the progressive implementation of recommendations relevant to the Australian Capital Territory. The likely impact on existing health services in implementing those recommendations which are applicable to the Commission are being examined.
In relation to confidentiality in claiming health benefits, protection of confidentiality for dependants in claiming medical insurance benefits has been discussed previously at a meeting of the Health Insurance Advisory Committee. Health insurance funds appreciate the position of children and student dependants, and generally do what they can to protect their privacy. In relation to dependants of Pensioner Health Benefit and Health Care card-holders, the Department of Social Security will make available duplicate cards on application, subject to adequate proof of identity. These duplicate cards enable the confidentiality of such dependants to be maintained.

1228 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Answers to Questions

The protection of individual privacy is being considered by the State plans for advanced education, the Council will generally

Law reform Commission.

follow the recommendations made by the State authorities.

Education
(Question No. 4508)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 19 April 1982:
(I) What are the cost estimates used for planning and funding purposes by the Tertiary Education Commission required for each equivalent full-time student (EFTS) in colleges of advanced education in Australia in (a) teacher education, (b) science based courses and (c) commerce/social science/humanities based courses in each State and Territory in 1982, 1983 and 1984.
(2) What are the average funded costs for each EFTS in the colleges of advanced education in (a) teacher education, (b) science based courses and (c) commerce/social science/humanities based courses for (i) Australia, (ii) each State and Territory and (iii) each individual college of advanced education for 1982, 1983 and 1984.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The factors which were taken into account by the advanced education Council in preparing its Advice to the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission (CTEC) in respect of recommendations for funding in the 1982-84 triennium are set out at paragraph 8.27 et seq of Volume I, Part 3 of the Commission's 'Report for 1982-84 Triennium '. The average cost estimate used by the Advanced Education Council was approximately $4,000 per equivalent full-time student (EFTS), which represented a 5.5 per cent increase on the existing level of support. The figure is expressed in estimated December 1980 costs levels. The CTEC did not support in full the Advanced Education Council's funding proposals (see paragraph 8.52 to 8.57 of Volume I Part I of the Commission's Report). It recommended a level of general recurrent funding some 5 per cent below that sought by the Council.
(2) In accordance with long standing arrangements, recurrent grants to higher education institutions are allocated by the Commonwealth on the basis of a block grant. The expenditure of that grant, including the allocation of funds to particular disciplines or areas of teaching, is a matter for the institution to determine. Consistent with this policy, the CTEC does not publish cost parameters used in developing its recurrent grant recommendations.
In the case of colleges of advanced education, these recommendations are based on advice from State authorities, in accordance with an agreement between the Commonwealth and State Ministers for Education made in June 1979. Under this arrangement, the allocation of funds for recurrent purposes in the advanced education sector by the CTEC is based on the folowing procedures:
(a) The total number of advanced education students and their mix in terms of individual institutions and fields and levels of study in a given State will be determined by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission on the advice of the Advanced Education Council after consultation with State authorities.
(b) The Commission, on the advice of the Advanced Education Council, will allocate the available funds to individual colleges after advice to the Council from the appropriate State authorities. As the development of individual colleges is largely a matter for the States in the light of co-ordinated

Department of Employment and Industrial Relations
(Question No. 4553)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) What organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler receive funding from the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the addresses of these organisations.
(3) What is the amount and type of funding for each organisation.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Canterbury Community Youth Support Scheme Project.
Other organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler may have received assistance under the Government's various manpower programs. However, this information is not recorded by electorate and is not readily available without a great deal of disruption to normal duties which I am not prepared to authorise.
(2) 42 Drummond Street, Belmore, NSW 2192.
(3) The funding is by grant and the amount paid in the period I July 1981 to 30 June 1982 was $85,005.92.
A further grant of $85,400 for the period I July 1982 to 30 June 1983 has been approved.
Vietnam
(Question No. 4567)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Australian of 19 April 1982, page 19, entitled 'Battling the black legacy of Vietnam'.
(2) Has he ordered his Department to conduct any investigation into the serious allegations made in that article about a number of violent incidents in Vietnam which involved only Australian troops; if so, when does he expect to receive a report of that investigation.
(3) Ifno investigation has been ordered by him, will he now do so; if not, why not.
(4) In view of the statement in that article that his Department has not compiled figures on the number of soldiers shipped back to Australia on the grounds of insanity, will he now (a) order those figures to be compiled and (b) provide them to the Parliament; if not, why not.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) No. Incidents of the type mentioned were investigated at the time.
(4) Records are held on 149 soldiers who were returned to Australia for a range of psychological or psychiatric reasons.

Answers to Questions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1229

Australian Citizenship
(Question No. 4587)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise that the Government will encourage migrants to obtain Australian citizenship.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The policy statement provided for a public awareness program to encourage migrants to obtain citizenship.
(2) Implementation is on-going. The Government has taken various initiatives to enhance the status, and increase awareness, of Australian citizenship. These initiatives include amendment of the Commonwealth Electoral Act to make Australian citizenship the basis for the franchise and for nomination for Parliament; a Task Force of the Australian Council on Population and Ethnic Affairs has examined citizenship enhancement strategies; a study of the factors which lead people to take out citizenship has been commissioned and is now completed; a review of the initiatives and measures in other countries, especially the ways and means of greater involvement of the community in the acquisition of citizenship, is underway. There has also been consideration of how Australian non-government organisations can participate in and contribute to the citizenship process and consultations are continuing. A review of the Australian Citizenship Act has been finalised and proposals for changes to the Act are currently available for public discussion. Community consultations on the proposed changes to the Citizenship Act will serve to further focus attention on, and increase awareness of, all aspects of citizenship.
Isolated Students in Remote Areas
(Question No. 4595)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy statement on 30 September 1980 promise a 3 year pilot program to provide onloan video facilities for isolated students in remote areas, beginning with students of the School of the Air.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
(3) What was the Commonwealth's appropriation and spending on this program in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The announcement of a 3 year pilot program to provide on-loan video facilities for isolated students in remote areas was made by the Prime Minister in his policy statement on 30 September 1980.
(2) After consultations between the Commonwealth and State Governments during 1981, agreement was reached on the allocation of funds to each State under the Loan Video Program. The program commenced from the beginning of 1982.
Each State will receive an agreed share of the $4m available to cover the three calendar years of the program's operation,

namely 1982 to 1984. Allocations to States have been calculated on the basis of the estimated numbers of isolated children studying at primary level by correspondence. The following table sets out the States' shares:

New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania
Northern Territory

$'000 678 69
1,848
309 522
21 552

In accordance with agreements reached, each State is free to make its own decisions on how best to use the allocated funds, provided they are directed at improving the access of isolated primary students to educational video or other audiovisual facilities. In most States this involves the purchase and loan to isolated families of video recorders and television monitors, as well as the production and distribution of video taped educational material.

States will be required after the end of each financial year to provide the Commonwealth with a detailed statement of how the funds have been spent.

(3) (a) Consultations were held with the States during 1980-81 but there was no expenditure of program funds.

(b) Appropriation and expected expenditure $1.34m.

National Language Policy
(Question No. 4635)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
Has the Government considered any action towards the development of a national language policy covering areas such as community languages, English as a second language and ethnic schools in accordance with the resolutions of the Ethnic Communities Councils of New South Wales and Victoria.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The general issue of the development of a national language policy is one that has been referred to a Committee in another place for investigation. The resolutions of the Victorian and New South Wales Ethnic Communities Councils Conferences on a national language policy, together with those from other State and Territory conferences, will form an important input to a national conference sponsored by the Federation of Ethnic Communities Councils in Canberra in October 1982. I hope that the recommendations of that Conference will form the basis of a substantial submission to the Committee's inquiry.
The issues involved in developing a national language policy touch on many aspects of Australian life. They include considerations relating to English language teaching, community languages, the role of languages in a multicultural society as well as our language needs for trade, diplomacy, cultural exchange, defence and tourism purposes. I therefore urge every interested person and organisation to ensure that they make their views known to the Committee when submissions are called for in the coming months.

Translators and Interpreters
(Question No. 4637)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:

1230 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) Can he indicate when the review of the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters will be completed.
(2) Will the review take into account the need for new educational programs for the training of translators.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) When the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAAT1) was established in 1977, it was envisaged that responsibility for the profession would, within five years, be assumed by a successor~body or bodies. Planning is under way for the devolution, at the beginning of 1983, of NAATl's functions to a national registration body and a national professional association.
The national registration body will have responsibility for the maintenance of standards~corresponding with the five levels of accreditation established by NAATI~for testing and other forms of assessment, for accreditation and for registration. The registration body, which will be incorporated as a company, will aim to become self-funding as rapidly as possible, but in its early years of operation will require government subsidies.
It is envisaged that the main functions of the national professional association will be to protect and further the interests of the profession, and represent its views, to maintain

discipline within the profession and uphold professional ethics, and to maintain liaison with the national registration body on all matters affecting the profession. No governmental action will be required towards the establishment of the association, but NAATI will do all that it can to encourage the emergence of an association, possibly based on a federation of existing association.
(2) NAATI has encouraged the establishment of courses for interpreters and translators by maintaining contact with educational institutions, with the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission and, where appropriate, with State and Territory post-secondary education authorities to advise on the need for training courses. The Authority is not in a position to fund educational programs, apart from occasional intensive training workshops designed to prepare candidates for NAATI tests.
Panels of experts composed principally of NAATI members and, where necessary, consultants with expertise in the languagejs concerned examine each course in person advising on the course content needed for NAATI approval and, where those standards are met, recommending the course to the Authority for approval.
Four training courses for interpreters and translators were being run by institutions at the time NAATI was established. A list of the eighteen courses now being conducted or which institutions plan to introduce in 1983 is given below.

Institution 1. Casuarina High School 2. School of Australia Linguistics (Darwin
Community College)
3. Institute for Aboriginal Development
4. Darwin Community College (i)
5. Perth Technical College (ii) 6. WA. CAE (Mount Lawley) (ii)
7. South Australian Dept. Further Education
8. South Australian Dept. Further Education (iii)
9. Adelaide College of the Arts and Education
10. Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (Technical College) (iv)
II. Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (CAE) (v)
12. Prahran CAE (vi)
13. Sydney Technical College
14. Petersham Technical College
15. Newcastle Technical College
16. Milpera CAE (vii)

State
N.T. N.T.

Level
I II

N.T.

1&"

N.T.

"

WA. WA.

"III

S.A.

II

S.A.

"

S.A.

III

Vic.

II

Vic.

III

Vic.

III

N.S.W. II

" N.S.W. " N.S.W. " N.S.W.

Category
Language aide Interpreter and Translator
Language aide and interpreter
Interpreter and Translator Interpreter Interpreter and Translator Interpreter
Translator

Languages
Italian, Greek Various Aboriginal languages, according to demand Arandic Group, Ngarrka Group, Western Desert Group Italian and Greek
French and Italian German and Italian
Croatian, Greek, Italian, Serbian, Spanish as above

Interpreter and Translator Interpreter and Translator
Interpreter and Translator Interpreter and Translator Interpreter
Interpreter
Interpreter
Interpreter and Translator

Greek and Italian
Spanish, Turkish, Vietnamese, Arabic, Serbian, Croatian, Greek, Italian
Croatian, Greek, Italian, Serbian
Croatian, Greek, Italian, Serbian
Arabic, Croatian, Greek, Italian, Serbian, Spanish, Turkish
Croatian, Greek, Macedonian, Serbian, Slovene, Vietnamese
Greek, Italian, Spanish, Vietnamese
To be decided

Answers to Questions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1231

Institution

State

Level Category

Languages

17. University ofWollongong (ii) 18. University of Queensland (viii) 19. Canberra CAE (ix)

N.S.W. II

Qld.

III

A.C.T. III

Interpreter and
Translator Interpreter and
Translator Interpreter and
Translator

Italian Japanese Italian and Spanish

(i) To commence in 1983. Not yet approved.
(ii) Commenced in 1982. Assessment in progress. (iii) Commenced in 1981. Not yet approved. Assessment in progress. (iv) Not yet approved. Assessment in progress.
(v) Course will terminate on graduation of 1981 intake. (vi) Croatian and Serbian streams not yet approved.
(vii) Course to be introduced in 1983. Not yet approved. (viii) Provisional Approval only. (ix) Course not offered in 1982. To be upgraded in 1983.

All Hallow's School, Five Dock
(Question No. 4650)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
In view of the Minister's inspection of All Hallow's School, Halley Street, Five Dock, New South Wales, will the school be eligible to obtain a grant for capital building works,
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Commonwealth Schools Commission's Planning and Finance Committee in New South Wales, the body responsible for making recommendations to the Commission on the capital needs of non-governemnt schools received an application for assistance from All Hallow's School on 16 June 1982. The school subsequently, on 20 July 1982, submitted a revised application which sought assistance with the demolition of the existing school and the construction of a new school.
Members of the Committee, which considers each application on the basis of the relative educational and financial need, visited the school on 29 July 1982 to discuss the application. A building consultant has also visited the school to discuss the various planning options with the school authorities.
It is anticipated that the school's application will be considered at a full Committee meeting in late August 1982. It will be appreciated that, in order to assess the relative claims of all applicant schools, the Committee must undertake a detailed examination of each school's application to assess the relative educational and financial need of each school. All Hallow's can be assured that the process of making a decision in relation to its application will be undertaken as expeditiously as possible. As soon as a decision has been made, the school will be advised accordingly.
The honourable member should be aware that demand from non-government schools for Commonwealth capital assistance far exceeds the funds available. The Commonwealth Schools Commission recently reported that in 1981 the New South Wales Planning and Finance Committee received 143 applications from non-government schools for capital grants. The applications involved grants which amounted to $53.1 m. Seventy-two of the applications, that is 50.3 per cent, were rejected due to lack of funds, even though 10 of them, involving grants worth about $4.6m. were given an A rating (top priority) in terms of both educational and financial need.

Unemployment
(Question No. 4671)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to Labour Forces Survey Data in January 1982 which shows that unemployed workers in the 60-64 year age bracket are expected to remain unemployed for an average of 2 years.
(2) Would those same people, in January 1981, only have remained unemployed for an average of 43 weeks.
(3) Do many older unemployed workers drop out of the job market when they discoverthe limited job opportunities available and the age discrimination by employers.
(4) What steps has his Department taken or will be taking to tackle the problems of age discrimination by employers and the psychological trauma suffered by older workers who are forced out of the work force and must remain unemployed for longer periods of time.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am informed by the Australian Statistician that there are no official statistics which show that in January 1982 unemployed workers in the 60-64 year age bracket were expected to remain unemployed for an average of two years.
The monthly labour force survey conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics produces estimates of the actual duration of unemployment up to the time of the survey-not the expected duration-for the following four age groups: 15-19; 20-24; 25-34; 35-54.
Information is compiled by the ABS for certain other age groups but, because the number of people in these categories who are selected in the sample is very small, the figures are not reliable because of the associated large sampling errors.
(3) The most recent statistics available on persons, classified by the ABS as 'discouraged job seekers' (that is, persons who wanted a job but were not actively looking for work because, for a variety of reasons, they believed they would not be able to find a job) were collected in September 1981. It is estimated that in September 1981 there were about 9, I00 discouraged job seekers 55 to 64 years of age who thought they would be considered by prospective employers to be too old to work. Source: ABS Supplementary Labour Force Survey, September 1981 (unpublished data).

1232 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Answers to Questions

(4) My Department is currently undertaking an examination of the position of older unemployed job seekers registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service so that appropriate assistance can be given. In addition, my Department's Bureau of Labour Market Research is planning a major study of unemployment among older workers which is due to be completed by June next year. This information will further increase my Department's capacity to develop soundly-based measures of assistance to counter employment disadvantages suffered by older workers.
Citizenship
(Question No. 4676)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Why have delays been experienced for some time between the time of application for citizenship and citizenship actually being granted.
(2) Can we give reasons for these delays and indicate the average waiting periods currently experienced by applicants.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The numbers of applications for citizenship have been increasing for some time and are currently 38 per cent above application levels last year. This higher application rate has resulted in the delays experienced in the processing of applications for citizenship.
The current average national processing time between date of receipt of an application for Australian citizenship until date of decision (approval or refusal) is 22 weeks. On average, a further 6 weeks elapses for conferral of citizenship at a departmental ceremony. Public ceremonies are conducted by local government authorities and the waiting period for these ceremonies varies considerably according to the size of the municipality and number of conferrals undertaken by the particular authority.
Action is currently being taken to reduce bottlenecks and streamline processing procedures generally.
Office of Technology Assessment
(Question No. 4696)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on Tuesday 17 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the creation, in 1972, of the Office of Technology Assessment to serve the United States Congress, with the primary function of providing Congress with assessments that identify the range of consequences of policy alternatives affecting technology.
(2) If so, is he able to say whether the Board of the Office consists of 6 senators and 6 members of the House of Representatives assisted by a staff of consultants.
(3) Has the Australian Government given consideration to establishing such an office.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) is governed by a Congressional Board consisting of six senators and six members of the House of Representatives. An Advisory Council of ten public members eminent in science, technology and education advises the Board on OTA assessments and other matters. The OTA has an in-house staff of 80-90 professionalofficers.

(3) On 18 April 1980 the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia reported to the Prime Minister. The Committee recommended:
that a Standing Committee of ASTEC be established with representatives from industry, the trade unions, scientists and technologists and government (including State Governments on a rotating basis), and with terms of reference as follows:
to review on a continuing basis the processes and trends in technological change in Australia and elsewhere; and to evaluate and report on the direct and indirect effects of technological change at the national level (Recommendation 28) that a Council of Technological Change be established comprising Commonwealth and State Ministers (Recommendation 29).
In the Government's response, Recommendation 28 was accepted and the Technological Change Committee is now in operation as a standing. committee of ASTEC. Recommendation 29 was not accepted, rather it was decided to draw the attention of existing Ministerial bodies, such as the Commonwealth-State Labour and Industry Ministers' Conferences, to the need for adequate consultation and cooperation in matters relating to technological change.
Medical Benefits
(Question No. 4718)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) When did he decide on changes to the Medical Benefits Schedule which were outlined in the Medical Benefits Circular No. 266.
(2) On what date and by what means did he convey this information to (a) registered funds and (b) relevant medical organisations.
(3) Who were the groups referred to in part 2 (b).
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Approval in principle to the amendments to the Medical Benefits Schedule which were outlined in Medical Benefits Circular No. 266 was given by the then Minister for Health, on 29 March 1982. I formally approved the amendments on 19 May 1982.
(2)-(3) Information relating to these amendments was conveyed initially by M. B. Circular No. 266 distributed on 12 May 1982. This was followed by a revised edition of the Medical Benefits Schedule Book incorporating all the amendments. Distribution of the book commenced on 9 June 1982.
M. B. Circular No. 266 was distributed to the Australian Medical Association and to all registered health insurance organizations and the Medical Benefits Schedule Book to all practising medical practitioners and all registered health insurance organisations.
Aboriginal Loans Commission and Aboriginal Land Fund Commission
(Question No. 4746)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What funds were allocated to the (a) Aboriginal Loans Commission and (b) Aboriginal Land Fund Commission in each year from the establishment of both Commissions in 1974 to their cessation in 1980.

Answers to Questions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1233

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(a) Aboriginal Loans Commission

Year
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Appropriation $
300,000 5,500,000 10,000,000
5,000,000 5,350,000 5,500,000

Total

31,650,000

(b) Aboriginal Land Fund Commission Year
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Appropriation $
2,975,500
2,018,000 Nil
750,000
543,000
800,000

Total

7,086,500

Electric-powered Motor Vehicles: Sales Tax Exemption
(Question No. 4755)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Has he received a submission from the National Secretariat of the Australian Electric Vehicle Association seeking exemption from sales tax for components used in the after market conversion of motor vehicles to electric drive; if so, has the Government given consideration to the possible saving on fuel bills to this country by the introduction of more electric vehicles.
(2) Will the Government, in the interests of the future conservation of power resources in Australia, give aid to this industry to provide a viable alternative to the petrol driven vehicle.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The submission referred to has been received by the Treasurer and has been considered.
(2) It is appreciated that electric-powered motor vehicles can have a number of advantages over petrol-powered alternatives. Most of these advantages would, however, benefit directly the purchaser of the vehicle who can be expected to weigh such benefits against the relative purchase prices of the two types of vehicle. It is relevant here that the Government's policy of import parity pricing of crude oil is itself broad encouragement to shift from petrol-powered vehicles to those using alternative sources of energy. In the circumstances, there appears to be no need for additional incentives to encourage the use of electric power in the transport area.
Independent Audit of Funds Granted to Non-government Organisations
(Question No. 4786)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The requirements of my Department are prescribed in Finance Directions Section 13/13 issued by the Secretary, Department of Finance, pursuant to Finance Regulation 127A. Essentially the Department requires organisations to vouch the proper expenditure of funds provided either in their normal audited financial statements in the case of general assistance grants or, in the case of specific purpose grants, by providing separate statements prepared by a qualified public accountant who is not a member of the organisation.
In the case of grants made under the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976, technical and cost investigation staff of the Board established under that Act perform technical and financial audits in relation to funds provided and the purposes for which they were provided.

Independent Audit of Funds Granted to Non-government Organisations
(Question No. 4792)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
To ensure proper accountability for the expenditure of Commonwealth funds my Department has prescribed rules relating to grants made by the Department to nongovernment organisations and one of the requirements is that each organisation should appoint an independent auditor to audit the organisation's annual financial statements in which each grant must be identified and accounted for separately.

Grants or Payments to Non-government Organisations
(Question No. 4812)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's
Department.

(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2)-

Productivity Promotion Council of

Australia . . . . . .

Technology Transfer Council

Australian Academy of Science

Academy of Social Sciences in Australia

Australian Academy of the Humanities

Australian Academy of Technological

Sciences

......

$
180,000 400,000 296,000
64,000 42,700
107,000

1234 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Australian Academies-Scientific Exchanges--China (paid to the Australian Academy of Science)

$ 120,000

Standards Association of Australia

2,460,000

National Association of Testing Authorities, Australia . . . . . . . .

767,000

Australian and New Zealand Association for the advancement of Science

5,000

Industrial Design Council of Australia

140,000

Sugar Research Institute

550,000

Brick Development Research Institute

120,000

Australian Welding Research Association

138,034

Bread Research Institute

253,814

Radiata Pine Research Institute

147,500

National Safety Council

160,000*

Under the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976,967 Commencement Grant applications were processed and 150 Project Grant applications
were approved during financial year 1981-82. Payments in 1981-82 for Commencement Grants totalled $9,699,996. Pay-
ments in 1981-82 for Project Grants totalled $12,052,877. Further particulars of these grants will be published later this year in the report for 1981-82 of the Australian Industrial Re-
search and Development Incentives Board.

* The 1981/82 expenditure for the National Safety Council appears in Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982/83, under the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations, as a conse-
quence of the transfer of the Working Environment Division to that Department. The 1981/82 payment was, however, made by the Department of Science and Technology.

Australian Council for Overseas Aid
(Question No. 4826)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What action has Australia taken to meet proposals of 2 April 1981 by the Australian Council for Overseas Aid on (a) public education (b) a 1985 aid target of 0.7 per cent of Gross National Product with priority for land rights for the rural poor and basic human needs (c) more agricultural and energy research in aid programs, (d) a better response to Third World proposals, (e) the Industries Assistance Commission studying effects of Australian protection on Third World countries and their poorer social groups, (f) more favourable World Bank and International Monetary Fund lending, (g) United Nations evaluation of international taxation of arms budgets, seabed mining, international travel and trade, and space satellite licensing (h) support for negotiating a United Nations code of conduct for transnational bodies and (j) the use of 0.1 per cent of defence budgets on arms control, and disarmament study centres, public peace projects, promotion, disarmament verification research, support for the United Nations Centre for Disarmament and upgrading related work in government departments.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Question No. 4826 asked on the 18 August 1982 would appear to be the same as question No. 3951 asked by the honourable member on 17 March 1982 to which I gave a written reply on 19 August 1982. I refer to the Hansard of that date. pages 795 to 797.

Diplomatic Recognition of North Korea and South Korea
(Question No. 4831)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
Will he bring up to date the information which his predecessor gave in answer to question No. 4419 (Hansard, II October 1979, page 2000) concerning diplomatic recognition accorded to (a) the Republic of Korea, and (b) the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question, according to information currently available, is as follows:
As of August 1982, formal recognition of the ROK and DPRK had been accorded by the following countries. (Where precise dates are unknown, alternatives are given in brackets).

Country
Afghanistan Albania Algeria Angola Antigua
Argentina
Australia Austria Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados Belgium
Belize
Benin Bolivia
Botswana Brazil
Bulgaria Burma
Burundi Cameroon Canada
Cape Verde Central African Republic
Chad Chile
People's Republic of China Colombia
Comoros

Date of Recognition

ROK DPRK

1.11.81 (2.11.81 )

26.12.73 17.5.49 25.9.58 13.4.76

15.2.62

31.10.61 31.7.74 22.5.63 17.12.74

17.4.76

18.12.73
15.11.77 2.5.62

16.12.73 (9.12.73)
5.12.77

24.4.65

5.2.73

18.4.68 27.11.74 31.10.59

19.5.75
10.8.61 10.8.61 (14.1.63)

29.11.48 16.5.75 (5.6.75) 11.3.67 3.3.72

5.9.63
6.8.61 12.6.62

18.8.75 4.2.77 (5.9.69)
8.5.69

6.10.49 10.3.62

19.2.79 13.11.75

Answers to Questions
Country
Congo Costa Rica Cuba Cyprus
Czechoslovakia Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador
Egypt EI Salvador
Equatorial Guinea Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia German Democratic Republic Federal Republic of Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan
Jordan Democratic Kampuchea Kenya Kiribati Kuwait
Laos Lebanon
Lesotho Liberia Libya Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1235

Date of Recognition

ROK DPRK

15.8.62

24.12.64 10.2.74 29.8.60

31.3.59 8.12.77 3.11.78
6.6.62 5.10.62 (5.12.61)
30.8.62

21. 10.48 17.6.73 30.6.77 18.9.79
24.8.62

14.9.79 23.12.63
30.1.71 24.8.73 15.2.49 1.10.62 21.4.65
1.12.54 14.11.77
5.4.61 1.8.74 24.10.62 6.1.78
13.6.68 22.9.62 11.12.63
1.4.62
10.10.62 10.12.73
17.8.73 23.10.62

30.1.69 5.6.75 14.4.75 1.6.73
29.1.74 2.3.73
7.11.49
14.11.77
9.5.79
8.10.58 16.3.74 18.5.74
11.11.48 27.7.73 10.12.73 16.4.64 15.4.73 30.1.68

9.4.62 24.11.56
23.7.61 \3.10.62 22.6.65 (18.12.65) 26.7.62
7.2.64 2.5.80 26.6.72 (26.2.72)
12.2.81 (1.10.69)
7.12.66 18.1.64 29.12.80 4.11.61 25.6.62 9.3.65 23.2.60 30.11.67
2.4.65 19.12.78
3.7.71

9.10.74
5.7.74 20.12.64
12.5.75
24.6.74 12.2.81
9.7.80 20.12.73
30.1.74
16.11.72 25.6.82 30.6.73 14.6.70 31.10.60 20.12.71 12.11.64 16.3.73

Country
Mexico Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Nauru Nepal The Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger
Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan
Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Rumania Rwanda Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles
Sierra Leone Singapore Solomon Islands Somalia Sri Lanka South Africa Spain St Kitts Nevis St Lucia St Vincent Sudan Surinam Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Tuvalu Uganda
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States of America
Upper Volta Uruguay Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Western Samoa

Date of Recognition

ROK DPRK

26.1.62
6.7.62
20.8.79 15.5.74 4.4.61 31.3.62 26.1.62 27.7.61
20.2.80 2.3.59
28.3.74
( 15.1.68) 30.9.62 19.5.76 15.6.62 1.4.63 3.3.49
15.4.61 18.4.74
21.3.63
16.10.62 19.10.62

4.9.80 15.10.48
25.6.75 25.2.82 15.5.74
21.8.79 6.9.76
(6.9.74) 25.5.76 22.6.73
9.11.72
1.6.76
16.10.48 15.4.75
3.11.48 27.4.72
9.8.75
8.9.72

(28.6.76) 25.6.62 8.8.75 15.9.78
14.11.77

(24.8.76) 14.10.71 8.11.75
12.4.67 15.7.70

17.3.50

23.2.79 28.10.79
13.4.77 28.11.75 18.11.68
11.3.59 18.12.62
1.10.58
11.9.70

13.9.79 3.4.81 21.6.69
7.4.73 20.12.74 25.7.66
13.1.65 8.5.75 31.1.73

31.3.69 8.3.57 15.11.78 26.3.63
18.6.80 18.1.49 12.8.48 (20.3.49) 20.4.62 7.10.64 5.11.80 29.4.65
15.9.72

16.7.75
30.7.72 (2.8.72) 12.10.48
11.10.72 1.10.81
28.10.74 31.1.50 28.6.78

1236 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Date of Recognition

Country

ROK DPRK

Yemen Arab Republic People's Democratic Republic of
Yemen Yugoslavia
Zaire . . Zambia Zimbabwe

9.3.62

1.4.63

7.2.68 30.10.48 15.12.72
12.4.69 18.4.80

Use of Toxic Chemicals in Vietnam: Parliamentary Questions
(Question No. 4853)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) How many (a) questions without notice, and (b) questions on notice, has he, or his predecessors, received since I January 1978 on any matters related to or arising out of United States. Australian, and allied forces use of toxic chemicals in Vietnam during hostilities there.
(2) Who was the member or senator asking the question, and what is the full Hansard reference, in each case.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) 14; (b) 30.
(2)--

Member or senator asking question

Hansard reference

Questions without Notice

Senator Bishop Senator Knight Mr L. Bowen
MrCadman Senator Evans
Senator Coleman Senator Grimes Mr Jones
Senator Kilgariff Senator Mason Senator Macklin Senator Jessop Senator Macklin Senator Macklin

9.10.79 25.3.80 26.3.80
1.4.80 30.4.80
15.5.80 24.3.81
30.4.81 15.9.81 16.2.82 18.2.82 23.2.82 25.2.82 29.4.82

Mr Holding Mr L. R. Johnson
Senator Mason Dr Everingham
Dr Everingham Dr Everingham
Dr Everingham Dr Everingham
Dr Everingham MrHolding
MrHolding
MrHolding
MrHolding Mrs Darling
MrHolding

Questions on Notice
15.5.80 15.5.80 15.5.80 15.5.80 19.8.80 19.8.80 19.8.80 19.8.80 24.2.81 31.3.81 29.4.81 6.5.81 13.5.81 13.5.81 5.6.81

p.1122 p.938 p.1203 p. 1498 p.1951 p.2365 p.660 p. 1807 p.726 p.6 p.143 p.229 p.478 p.1655
p. 2876 p.2877 p.2364 p. 2878 p.423 p.429 p.442 p.446 p. 53 p.1155 p.1772 p.2084 p.2362 p. 2369 p. 3303

Member or senator asking question
MrHolding Senator Grimes Senator Walsh MrHolding Senator Chipp Dr Cass DrCass Dr Cass DrCass Senator Mason Senator Mason MrHolding MrHolding MrHolding MrHolding

Hansard reference
10.6.81 p.3715 12.6.81 p. 3270 27.8.81 p.482 13.10.81 p.1944 14.10.81 p.1230 14.10.81 p.2047 15.10.81 p.2157 15.10.81 p.2157 15.10.81 p.2158 26.11.81 p.2758 27.11.81 p.2782 16.2.82 p. 189 5.5.82 p.2325 not yet answered not yet answered

Concord Repatriation Hospital
(Question No, 4919)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
(I) What number of landings by helicopters have been made within the grounds of Concord Repatriation Hospital since I July 1981.
(2) What equipment is held at the Hospital to cope with a helicopter crashing (a) on land and (b) in the adjoining Parramatta River.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Since I July 1981 there have been seven landings by helicopters in the grounds of Repatriation General Hospital, Concord. These landings have all been associated with medical emergencies. The helipad at the Repatriation General Hospital is not used for routine landings.
(2) (a) The following equipment is available at the Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, for rescues on land:
(I) fire tender, including an additional capacity of approximately two hundred litres of foam;
(2) electrical fire extinguishers; (3) fuel fire extinguishers; (4) magnesium extinguishers (dry chemical for use in both
electrical and fuel fires); (5) a 'group call' paging system for alerting the disaster
team; (6) general stores for use in disaster situations.
(b) Special equipment is not available at the Hospital for rescues from water. Community emergency services would be utilised and supplemented by the full range of emergency measures available from within the Hospital.
Answers to Questions on Notice
(Question No. 4953)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.

Answers to Questions

8 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1237

(2) How many questions on notice has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The distribution and co-ordination of questions on notice is the responsibility of the Parliamentary Questions Officer within the Department who allocates each question to that area of the Central Office of the Department with responsibility for the subject matter. A response is prepared by an officer in the relevant area and approved by the Divisional Head. Following the Secretary's endorsement of the proposed answer it is sent to the Minister's Senior Private Secretary for the Minister's approval.
(2) 193.
(3) 62 days.
(4) (a) 86; (b) 36; (c) 4; (d) none; (e) none.
(5) 23, none of which has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Water Research
(Question No. 4977)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Did the report of the Australian Water Resource Council (A WRC) Working Group on water research policy state that examination of other research programs indicates that overall success relies heavily on the calibre of the full-time support staff and in this regard criticism has been directed at the support provided by the Minister's Department for the AWRC water research program.
(2) Has the Government accepted the recommendation of the Working Group that a National Office of Water Research be established within the Minister's Department with a full time director and adequate support staff to service the new National Water Research Council; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes
(2) The Government has decided not to establish a National Office of Water Research at this time, and the support staff requirements for the National Water Research Council will be taken up by my Department shortly with the Public Service Board.
River Murray
(Question No, 4978)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:

(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article in the Adelaide News of 28 July 1982, entitled 'Mighty Murray now a dam' and, in particular, the comments of the South Australian Minister for Water Resources that (a) the State Government would seek to transfer responsibility for the river mouth to the River Murray Commission and (b) Victoria, New South Wales and the Commonwealth should at least share the cost of keeping the river mouth dredged.
(2) Has the Government been approached by the South Australian Government in relation to these matters, and does the Minister support the State Government's proposals.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Government has not been approached by South Australia on these matters, but the River Murray Commission would be the appropriate forum for initial discussions.
Nugan Hand Group
Mr Newman-On 6 May 1982 (Hansard, page 2334) Mr Hayden asked me a question without notice concerning two reports by a person who was formerly an Army Investigator. He asked whether I was aware of the existence of a second report which, he indicated, dealt with illegal activities by Nugan Hand, their associates and other persons who are prominent in public life,
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I advised on 6 May that I was aware of the existence of one report and undertook to check further to see whether there was a second report.
A copy of the second report has since been located. It is dated 17 February 1971 and was a follow-up report to the first report dated 19 January 1971. The first report had dealt primarily with some Army personnel involvement with black marketing; the second report had dealt with civilian personnel that came to notice during the black marketing investigation.
I am advised that careful examination of the report has failed to reveal any such mention or evidence of any connections with Nugan Hand, their associates or other persons prominent in public life. This view has been reached after enquiry into the appropriate Department of Defence records and enquiries to the Commonwealth/New South Wales Joint Task Force into Drug Trafficking. Furthermore, I am advised that an outline of the two reports appeared in the Melbourne Sun Herald of 13 March 1971.
In relation to the requested information on action taken by the authorities following receipt of those reports, I have been advised by my colleague, the Minister for Defence, that the first report resulted in subsequent disciplinary charges against certain members of the Australian Army. In respect of the second report, my colleague advised that the report had been requested by an officer of the then Department of External Affairs on 23 January 1971 and had been forwarded to the Secretary of that Department on 3 March 1971, for any further enquiry by that Department in relation to the Australian Embassy in South Vietnam.


