House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Thursday, 16 September 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Questions without Notice

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1509

Thursday, 16 September 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
NUGAN HAND MERCHANT BANK Notice of Motion
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That in the opinion of this House, and notwithstanding the 6-year delay which has ensued, the Attorney-General of New South Wales should now publicly name and immediately prosecute those persons who, with criminal intent to cause a perversion of justice, attempted to prevent investigations into the activities of the Nugan Hand Merchant Bank in 1976.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION ACT Notice of Motion
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo)-I give notice of my intention to present, at the next day of sitting:
A Bill for an Act to amend the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973 to require the Industries Assistance Commission to include in any document published by it the views of the Commission on the economic, social and employment consequences of giving effect to any recommendations set out in the document.
This proposal is seconded by the honourable member for Indi.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
MEDICAL FRAUD Dr BLEWETT-J direct my question to the Minister for Health. As the Department of Health was aware of extensive fraud and overservicing by doctors as early as 1976, why was no effective data base for detecting fraud and overservicing established until April 1981? Why were no medical sanctions introduced until May 1982? Why has no legislation yet been introduced to facilitate the effective processing of medical fraud cases i~ the courts?
Mr CARLTON-I draw the attention of the House to the fact that currently an inquiry is being carried out by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts into these very matters. It is not my intention to carry out myself, on a day-by-day basis, an inquiry exactly of this kind. I am examining in great detail the various procedures adopted by the Department of Health and other departments which might be involved in this area of systems to satisfy myself that the Government is taking all necessary action to prevent fraud and overservicing so far as that is humanly possible.

I think it would be a great pity if I were to conduct a separate investigation of my own in parallel with the kind of investigation that is being very adequately conducted by the Public Accounts Committee. I remind the House that this is a bipartisan Committee, and I am looking forward very much to the progress report it will introduce, I understand in November. Last year my predecessor the honourable member for Warringah introduced a number of new measures to reduce the extent of fraud and overservicing. My preliminary inquiries so far indicate that we may have to take some further measures, but I am absolutely not going to be stampeded into making stupid, fast decisions because of any immediate raising of particular scandals on a day to day basis by the Opposition.
I make it quite clear that I regard this matter as a very important one, as did my two predecessors as Minister for Health. But I will not be stampeded into making unduly rapid or stupid decisions. By the time the Public Accounts Committee comes out with its interim report in November I will have formed a very firm view as to additional measures that might be needed. It will then be possible to proceed on a well-founded basis.
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE
Mr BOURCHIER-Can the Minister for Primary Industry advise whether he has received a response from the State governments of Victoria and New South Wales in regard to his proposals for assistance to small business in declared drought areas?
Mr NIXON-I am delighted to be able to tell the honourable member that at least the Victorian Government has shown some sympathy for those affected by drought and has agreed to meet the Commonwealth's requests and wishes in respect of the core measures. In case any honourable member does not understand what they mean-I expect some people are a little short on knowledge-I will repeat them to the House. The Commonwealth decided that it ought to reimburse local government authorities for the cost of sinking bores in central locations for water for stock and also manning costs where applicable. We will increase the carry-on loans for primary producers to $40,000 and provide carry-on loans of up to $40,000 for small businesses in drought declared areas. We will set the water cartage subsidy at 100 per cent and the freight subsidy on the transport of fodder and livestock at 75 per cent. No greater interest rate than 4 per cent ought to be charged on Commonwealth money. The honourable member for Bendigo asked whether

1510 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Questions without Notice

Victoria had picked up the measures to aid small businesses. It appears from information I received this morning that the Victorian Government will pick up the core measures. I am glad that at least it has recognised how serious this drought is.
I draw to the attention of the House again that New South Wales is failing dismally in its responsibility. I do not know how Mr Hallam, the Minister for Agriculture, can look at himself in the mirror when he shaves each morning. He has quite callously ignored the request by the Commonwealth to lift the core measures and has made no effort whatsoever to understand the seriousness of the drought in that State. About 51 out of 58 pasture protection boards in the State have been declared as being under serious drought conditions. The State Government is not prepared to lift the subsidy rate to help farmers, even though the Commonwealth will be paying $3 for each $1 which the State spends after it has spent its first $10m. We have even made $lOm available for that State because of its total budgetary situation and the fact that it has mismanaged the State's finances. It is a serious matter for the farmers in New South Wales that that State is applying criteria which make it almost impossible for anybody to be eligible for drought assistance.
I raised also with Mr Hallam the question of the limit which the State Government puts on the value of properties before drought aid can be applied. It has set a value limit of $350,000. It is a criterion set by the State only. It is not a criterion which the Commonwealth sought. It makes a great number of properties throughout New South Wales ineligible for assistance. It is time that the New South Wales Government had a real look at the seriousness of drought in that State and decided to do something about it. The Commonwealth has put down special provisions on interest rate subsidies and fodder subsidies. We are paying for them entirely. All we have asked the State to do is to meet the core measures on a $3 for $1 basis.
MEDICAL SERVICES COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
Mr LEO McLEAY-I ask the Minister for Health: Are there extensive log-jams in bringing doctors suspected of overservicing before Medical Services Committees of Inquiry? What are the reasons for these delays? Has the Minister taken any action to relieve these log-jams?
Mr CARLTON-I advise the House that the Medical Services Committees of Inquiry are the bodies set up to look into suggestions of overservicing by doctors. Of course, over-servicing is that area which does not involve fraud but where

it is suspected that services may have been rendered which are not strictly necessary for the treatment of the patient. As honourable members will understand, there is a very difficult boundary between what is strictly unnecessary and what is judged by a conscientious doctor to be an additional visit based on genuine concern for the patient. There is, first of all, a system of medical counselling whereby officers of the Department of Health who are registered medical practitioners go to see doctors who might have been shown up by computer profiles to be suspected of overservicing. Then, if there is a need for any further action, the matter is referred to a Medical Services Committee of Inquiry which consists of a number of doctors independent of that doctor. My preliminary examination of this system indicates to me that there may well be a need to reexamine it and to make it less cumbersome. This was drawn to my attention originally by my predecessor in this office, the honourable member for Warringah, as one of the matters that he was looking into, and also by the Department. I am pleased-I repeat what I said earlier-that the !oint Committee of Public Accounts is looking mto these aspects also. I might remind the honourable member for Grayndler that this is a bipartisan committee. Therefore, I can be assured that this committee will be looking at the matter in a totally objective fashion. That will aid me in my own investigations.
BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY CO. LTD
Mr TUCKEY-I refer the Prime Minister to his meeting with steel industry unions to discuss the results of the Government's decision to protect Australian steel consumers from the second most expensive steel manufacturer in the world. Is the report in the last issue of the Bulletin correct when it says that Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. suffers a direct negative effect of $25m due to its obligati?ns under the Navigation Act to employ Australian owned and crewed shipping? As such an amount could be measured as equivalent to 1,250 jobs on land, does the Prime Minister propose any moves to give BHP and its workers protection also from this obviously inefficient and featherbedded sector of Australian industry?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-In all the discussions that BHP has had with the Government that aspect is not one that has been brought to my attention with any strength at all. It might well ha.ve been mentioned to some of my colleagues. I thmk we know that coastal shipping is expensive. This is one of the reasons for the Crawford report, the report of the Committee of Revitalisation of the Australian Shipping Industry. It is also one of

Questions without Notice

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1511

the reasons why the Government, the companies and the unions made decisions in relation to the Crawford report which we hope will lead to a much more satisfactory situation. Yesterday the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce and the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations had discussions with representatives of the Federated Iron Workers Association of Australia about the future of the industry. As a result of those discussions an industry council will be established within the ambit of the Department of Industry and Commerce. It will be chaired by one of the Ministers I mentioned, depending on the matters for discussion. It is hoped that that council will meet within four weeks. We will be seeking the views of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the unions, BHP and the steel industry on the composition of the council and its terms of reference.
I think there is a general recognition that a considerable period of restructuring is likely to be necessary if Australia is to have an efficient and viable steel industry. There is also a common view amongst the union representatives and ourselves that Australia, with her own iron ore and coal and in view of the capacities of Australian working men and women, must be able to maintain a viable steel industry. I think it is not reasonable necessarily to compare one aspect of taxation or transport facing BHP as an industry with t.hat aspect only of other industries. It is an overall SItuation that one would need to take into account. Other steel industries need to cart their coal and iron ore thousands of miles. They seem to be able to operate on a realistic basis. Both commodities are home grown in Australia. In addition to that BHP as a group has access to considerable profits from other forms of its activities.
We are altering the tax law in a way which will provide advantages to BHP as a group enabling it and other companies to write off losses from one part of its operations within the group against profits from another. In addition to that, special depreciation provisions were introduced a year ago to assist BHP. It is not only a question of looking at whatever situation might develop in relation to sea transport; one needs to look at the overall situation and the impact on BHP of current world trading situations and the difficulties in the steel industry around the world which are obviously now being shared by BHP itself. I must say that I found the attitude of the Federated Iron Workers representatives constructive and helpful. I believe that the industry council that will be established shortly will be effective in providing advice and liaison between different segments of the industry and the Government.

SUGAR INDUSTRY
Mr BRAITHWAITE~My question is directed to the Minister for Trade and Resources. In view of the current disastrous world sugar prices and the oversupply position throughout the world, will the Minister advise the House of the prospects for Australia's efficient and competitiv.e sugar industry? Has the Minister read the edItorial of the Australian Financial Review of Tuesday, 7 September 1982? Does he agree t~at the Ord project for sugar would be an expensive misallocation of funds and that the pursuance of such a policy would be throwing good money after bad?
Mr ANTHONY~I have to agree that the international sugar market is in a very serious and grave situation because of the basic oversupply of sugar on the world market as well as the effects of sweeteners, or synthetic sugars, which are now taking a greater place in the market. It seems that the only way in which this situation can be sensibly handled is through a co-operative approach by exporters of sugar. At the moment those countries which basically rely on export sales of sugar are feeling the impact. Certainly the Australian sugar industry is. The situation is having catastrophic effects for many of the developing countries around the world.
One of the largest suppliers to the world sugar market is the European Economic Community, which today is supplying something like 18 per cent of the world's sugar exports. Unfortunately, the EEC is not co-operating with the International Sugar Agreement in trying to bring some orderly marketing arrangements into place. The EEC is really the loose card in the pack, inhibiting efforts to get some discipline on the world market. Australia is participating fully. At the moment Australia is holding back stocks of something like 152,000 tonnes and by the end of 1983 Australia is required to hold 380,000 tonnes. This level, in conjunction with the minimum quota arrangements, is certainly imposing a heavy penalty on the Australian industry. Because of these great difficulties and because o~ the ?atu:e of the operations of the EEC I had diSCUSSions m London last week with the Executive Director of the International Sugar Council to see what further action might be taken to try to get greater support from the EEC in imposing upon itself ~he same disciplines as all other sugar producmg countries around the world are imposing. This is something I intend pursuing further in the interests of the Australian sugar industry. In relation to the second part of the question~-
Mr Hawke-Well, wind up.

1512 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Questions without Notice

Mr ANTHONY-The honourable member for Wills might not be very interested in the sugar industry.
Mr Hawke-What about the Ord? Will you start it up on the Ord too?
Mr ANTHONY-The honourable member for Wills should be quiet for a moment and listen to my answer to the second part of the question. I was just going to talk about the Ord. The Australian Labor Party does not seem to be very concerned about the sugar industry's problems. The honourable member for Dawson in the second part of his question referred to the Ord River scheme. I can understand the very great concern of the sugar producers in Queensland and northern New South Wales, at a time when they are having to restrict their production and spend money on stockpiling, about talk of further expansion of the Australian sugar industry, particularly on the Ord River. The Premier of Queensland has already been to see the Prime Minister and other Ministers expressing his concern, which I share fully.
For the Western Australian Government at this stage to be talking of expanding the sugar industry in that State when there is such uncertainty about the future of the industry is indeed taking an enormous risk. If it wants to take such a risk it will have to bear the risk fully itself. There will be no Commonwealth Government subvention or support to help it. I believe that in the present economic circumstances any sensible persons looking at the economic consequences of developing a sugar industry in that part of Western Australia would be outlaying money on which they would find it very difficult to get a decent return. Whether such people come from overseas or Australia, I am sure that they will be looking very closely at the total economic circumstances before they make a move to expand the sugar industry into Western Australia.
MEDICAL FRAUD
Mr MILDREN-I direct a question to the Minister for Health. Is it a fact that in 1980 a major health fund was frustrated in its relations with the Department of Health on medifraud issues because a public servant had locked material in a drawer without telling anyone and subsequently took extended sick leave from the Department? Has the Minister taken any action to deal with the problem, apparently endemic in the Public Service, of locked drawers and extended sick leave? What steps has the Minister taken to improve contact between the funds and the Department in medifraud cases?

Mr CARLTON-It is interesting to hear the honourable member for Ballarat suggest that certain problems are endemic in the Public Service, particularly when the Australian Labor Party's policy on health matters relies on a substantial extension of the very same Public Service. This question really demonstrates how absurd it is for this House to act on behalf of its own Joint Committee of Public Accounts in trying to investigate detailed matters of this kind and in attempting to try people on the floor of this House before that sensible investigation has been concluded. I merely draw the attention of the House to the fact that this Committee has on it a number of honourable members, assisted by able staff, who are more able than honourable members on the floor of this House to examine this type of question.
MEDICAL FRAUD
Mr SCOTTHas the attention of the Minister for Health been drawn to a report in the Age of 11 September based on an Australian Federal Police file which suggests extraordinary dereliction of duty by the regional office of the Department of Health in Victoria relating to inaction in medifraud, minimal recovery of moneys overpaid because of overservicing and suspected fraud and the possible cover up of medical fraud? Does this material confirm other evidence before the Minister suggesting the comparative ineffectiveness of some regional offices in pursuing medical fraud? Has the Minister investigated these allegations? What action has he taken?
Mr CARLTON-Of course my attention has been drawn to these reports. A lot of the material that has been appearing in the newspapers has apparently been leaked to them from the material which was made available quite readily by my Department to the Public Accounts Committee. In fact, the honourable member's question relates to the inquiry currently being undertaken by that Committee under the chairmanship of my friend the honourable member for Bradfield. The same principles apply to this set of allegations as applied to those raised in previous questions. Those are currently under investigation by the Public Accounts Committee. I have asked the Chairman of the Committee whether that Committee could bring in an interim report and he has gladly agreed to have the Committee do that.
As to any suggestions that criminal activities might have been undertaken by members of my Department, that has to be a matter for investigation by the Australian Federal Police. The police have conducted inquiries and the appropriate recommendations have come back. In a letter

Questions without Notice

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1513

to the Director-General of Health from the Australian Federal Police it was indicated that there appeared to be no evidence for criminal charges against officers from the Department. However, if there is any suggestion from any quarter whatsoever that insufficient action has been taken to date and that further action might be taken, of course I stand ready to act on such a suggestion.
TAX EVASION
Mr SAINSBURY-Has the Treasurer's attention been drawn to a statement that trust stripping has continued unabated in Australia? Is he in a position to comment on this statement and to report to the Parliament?
Mr HOWARD-My attention has been drawn to a question asked yesterday in another place by the shadow Attorney-General, and I heard that gentleman on the radio this morning talking about the same matter. He said that he had received advice from people who knew that trust stripping practices were going on unabated and that hundreds of millions of dollars were being lost to the revenue. He said: 'It is worse than the bottom-of the-harbour'. I remind the honourable gentleman of three things. Firstly, any person who enters into an arrangement for the purpose of securing that a trustee will be unable to pay the trust's income tax liability has since 4 December 1980 been liable to prosecution under the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act. So if Senator Evans has any evidence that this is going on he has a duty not to conceal that evidence. He has a duty not to be the misprision of a felony, and to bring that evidence to my attention. I hope that he does it immediately and demonstrates the sincerity of his concern.
I also remind the honourable gentleman that trust stripping activity by other people connected with it is, according to all of the advice I have received, within the provisions of Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, which came into effect on 27 May 1981. In case there was any doubt about that, I made a statement on 11 May 1982 giving a very clear warning that if people believed that such activity was not caught by Part IVA and that was ultimately found to be the case, then effective specific remedial legislation with effect from 11 May 1982 would be brought down by the Government. Against that sort of background I seriously dispute the claims made by Senator Evans. If he has any evidence that I am wrong, he should let me see it.
TAX EVASION
Mr YOUNG-Has the Treasurer heard of a company called Hotchkiss Pty Ltd.? Is he aware

that a former leader of the Liberal Party in New South Wales was a director of that company? Is it a fact that legal opinion was furnished to the Australian Taxation Office and also to the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Sydney indicating that the company had been stripped of its assets and that criminal proceedings against the directors were available to the Commonwealth? Were such criminal proceedings withheld because the Treasurer personally intervened?
Mr HOWARD-I wish to deal with the last part of the question and with any suggestion that I intervened on behalf of any person in respect of a taxation matter to prevent prosecution, and in particular in respect of this person, who I understand to have been Mr McDonald, because he himself has said that he was involved. To my very clear recollection-I recollect the event very clearly-that person come to see me two or three years ago. On that occasion he said that he was involved in a difference of opinion with the Taxation Office. I said to him on that occasion: 'If that is the case I cannot do anything about it because, as you well know, it is within the authority of the Taxation Commissioner to resolve these matters'. I further indicated to Mr McDonald that if there were any matter that he wished to put to me which could be the subject of a normal and proper ministerial representation I would refer it in the same way as I would refer anybody else's representation. I can tell the House that I received no such representation from Mr McDonald. Any suggestion of any kind that I intervened to stop a prosecution against Mr McDonald or anybody else is utterly unfounded and untrue.
FARMERS: HOUSEHOLD SUPPORT
Mr HICKS-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. I refer to cases in which farmers' income has been so reduced by the drought that they have no income and, because of the unemployment benefit criteria, they are ineligible for that form of support. Is the household support scheme available to those farmers?
Mr NIXON-One of the elements of rural adjustment support that is discussed on a regular basis with the State ministers is the question of household support in times of dire need on the part of farmers stricken by low commodity prices, drought or other natural disaster. There is a program available whereby household support can be obtained by any farmer by simply applying to the rural finance corporation or a like body of his State. Funds are made available by the Commonwealth to fund that program. I do not think any contribution is required by the State.

1514 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Questions without Notice

Farmers who are unable to obtain the unemployment benefit, even though they are drought stricken and unable to be properly employed on their own places, can get household support in that way. There is no limit to the number of applications that can be made. I do not think there is an actual limit laid down by the Commonwealth as to the volume of funds that could be made available. It is quite open to any State, in the administration of its drought policy, to apply household support for any application against the criteria laid down.
I have to express my absolute disappointment with the approach taken by the New South Wales Government in the administration of the drought policies in that State. The State Government is dragging its feet behind every other State of the Commonwealth. Its performance has been absolutelyabysmal. I can understand why the people in New South Wales country areas do not like Labor.
ASIA DAIRY INDUSTRIES (HONG KONG) LTD
Mr KERIN-Has the Minister for Primary Industry had the latest report on Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong Ltd) by the Auditor-General since 27 April 1982? Has the Attorney-General advised the Minister that it is appropriate and proper for the report to be tabled? Was it made known that this report would be tabled in August? If so, why has the Minister held on to it for five months, and when will he table it?
Mr NIXON-I hope to be in a position to seek the permission of the Manager of Opposition Business to make a statement on that very subject today. I have been delayed for a couple of hours because I noticed the matter of public importance which I have to deal with first. Let me answer the question directly. The fact of the matter is that the Auditor-General's report did come in. It was referred to the Attorney-General's Office for comment and was also referred to the Australian Dairy Corporation for comment. There was an exchange between the Australian Dairy Corporation, the Auditor-General and the Attorney General's Department. The matter came back to my hands only in the last couple of weeks. I have prepared a statement and I am ready to put it down today.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
Mr O'KEEFE-Can the Minister for Transport and Construction inform the House as to how local government will benefit from the Australian Bicentennial Road Development

Program? Would he assure the House that there will be an equitable distribution of funds available for local government roads to help supplement those presently available under the Roads Grants Act?
Mr HUNT-The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program will be of tremendous benefit to the road network throughout Australia.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Tell us all about it, Ralph.
Mr HUNT-The Prime Minister suggests that I should tell you all about it. I am about to do that. The Program will provide assistance for the development of our national highway system to a very high international standard by the bicentennial year 1988. I see that the honourable member for Wills is smiling. Honourable members on the government benches will enjoy a great occasion when we celebrate completion of a really first class road system in Australia-not only a national road system but also a first class urban and rural arterial road system. Local government stands to gain enormously from this Program. Indeed, in this financial year the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program-we do not have a nickname for it yet but we will shortly and what is more, we will also have a jingle for it-will assist in development of local roads. When roads grants funds are added to the Program's funds the amount for local roads will be increased by approximately 24 per cent this financial year. In the next financial year, 1983-84, there will be an estimated increase of 46 per cent over the 1981-82 allocation. So we will see a tremendous improvement in local and shire roads throughout Australia.
I know how happy the local government bodies are about this. They are a little bit concerned at the fact that they are having to pay the excise on distillate but they know they will be fully compensated by the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program. The other very important aspect to it, of course, is that it will provide job opportunities on a regional basis right around Australia. The most conservative estimate that was put to me is that it will provide 8,000 additional jobs directly and at least a further 12,000 indirectly. That involves using a multiplying factor of about 1.5, which I think is conservative for road construction works. I am inclined to think that it could provide jobs for up to 30,000 people in Australia. I am quite positive--
Mr Armitage-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. On many occasions you have drawn attention to the fact that Ministers take up far too

Questions without Notice

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1515

much of Question Time, obviously quite deliberately. You have drawn attention to the fact that the Minister could make a statement to the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has made his point.
Mr Armitage-The Minister is quite deliberately taking up Question Time. Would you ask him to draw his answer to a conclusion and not to prostitute Question Time?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley will resume his seat. There is no point of order. However, the point made by the honourable gentleman is correct. I ask the Minister for Transport and Construction to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HUNTMr Speaker, I shall certainly take your advice. I love the question and I love the answer. I say to the honourable member for Paterson, who is very interested in local government-honourable members may not be aware that he is still serving in local government-that local government will benefit also from the income tax sharing arrangements by 21 percent.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HUNT-That will be of tremendous help to local government. So to all-
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister for Transport and Construction is so wrapped up in his answer that he can not hear my saying to him that I insist that he draw his answer to a conclusion. If he draws his answer to a conclusion quickly the noise will cease.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. As the Minister arrived at the dispatch box to commence his answer he received an instruction to keep talking. That is what he is doing even though he has lowered the performance of the House to an even lower level of farce than that to which the--
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Hayden-I think that in fairness it ought to be recognised that the Minister is filibustering because the Government finds Question Time embarrassing and discomforting. The filibustering ought to be brought to an end.
Mr SPEAKER-I point out to the Leader of the Opposition-he ought to know this well-that under the Standing Orders I have no power to require a Minister to cease an answer unless he is

being irrelevant. In fact, the Minister is being relevant to the question which was asked. It has been my practice, however, to interrupt a Minister before he ceases his answer when he has gone too far.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I think it is about time we had some decorum from the Minister. I cannot see how it was relevant to be laughing and giggling, pointing to the honourable member opposite and giving credit for his long service in local government. How in the name of fortune is that relevant to the question that has been asked?
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister for Transport.
Mr HUNT-To conclude on the matter of local government and the great advantages that will accrue to local government from the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program, let me say that not only will local government benefit from the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program but it will benefit also from a 21 per cent increase under the tax sharing arrangement, which in this year will provide an additional $75m for local government throughout Australia.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister has already provided that information to the House.
TAX EVASION: LEGAL ADVICE
Mr DUFFY-I address my question to the Treasurer. I refer him to his Press release No. 136 of 25 July wherein he stated that after the McCabe-Lafranchi report-that is, in about May 1982-the Government asked the Solicitor General to review earlier legal advice given to the Government on prosecutions prior to December 1980 for tax evasion and that the Solicitor General had advised that in relation to a particular case action was available under Commonwealth and State laws. I ask: In view of the fact that numerous opinions were given between 1975 and 1980 that prosecutions could have been launched under existing laws, why did the Government delay for seven years before seeking advice from the Solicitor-General?
Mr HOWARD-Already a central issue in the debate of the past couple of weeks is the circumstances whereby the Government formed a bona fide but perhaps, and I underline the word 'perhaps', mistaken belief at the time that it was not possible under the laws which existed prior to December 1980 to take criminal proceedings against people involved-I use that term in a fairly strict sense-in bottom-of-the-harbour tax evasion practices. I have already indicated the

1516 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Questions without Notice

chain of events which led to my forming that bona fide belief. I have already told the House that in December 1980 a number of people who were objecting to the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill because they thought it went too far put to the Government a view that one of the reasons that the Bill ought not to be enacted was that the existing law was adequate. On that occasion I again sought the view of the Australian Taxation Office and through it the matter was discussed again, so I was advised, with the Crown Solicitor, the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and officers of the Attorney-General's Department. As a result of that--
Mr Barry Jones-But not the Solicitor General.
Mr HOWARD-No, on that occasion, not the Solicitor-General. I have never represented otherwise. It was because--
Mr Barry Jones-Why?
Mr HOWARD-The reason was that McCabe and Lafranchi had indicated a view of the law different from what the Government and I had believed to be the law. On receiving the McCabeLafranchi report I got in touch with the Attorney General and said that we ought to test the view that had been put by McCabe, Lafranchi and, ultimately, Costigan. We got the view of the Solicitor-General. That situation has been made plain in the past. I repeat again that it remains to be seen who is right about applicability of the pre-1980 law. Until such time as a court of this country demonstrates that a person involved in that could have been effectively prosecuted under the previous law, the opinions given by the Solicitor-General, whom I respect enormously as a lawyer, and the opinion given by Mr Costigan represent not declarations of the law, but opinions by them about the law.
TASMANIAN FREIGHT EQUALISATION SCHEME
Mr IAN CAMERON-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport and Construction. Being of national importance, I expect a long answer. As the mainland and in particular Queensland is being inundated by apples from a certain place, is a review being undertaken of the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme by his Department?
Mr HUNT-I did have discussions with some apple grower representatives from both Queensland and New South Wales about what they claim to be an oversupply situation in Australia at present, particularly on the mainland. They were inclined to blame the Tasmanian

Freight Equalisation Scheme, but I did explain to them that it was not an industry assistance scheme. The scheme was designed to remove any disadvantage from Tasmanian producers that they may experience as a result of not having available to them more competitive and lower cost road and rail freight to the mainland. I also informed them that a review of the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme was under way at present and is nearing conclusion. They made a submission to the Department and it is under active consideration at present.
I would like to give an assurance to the House that the Government will be examining the outcome of that review in the very near future. The Government has consistently said, however, that it will not, in any way, break down the principles of the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme which was designed to ensure that producers in Tasmania were not disadvantaged because they did not have available to them cheaper forms of transport such as rail and road.
PROMOTION OF AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURED EXPORTS
Mr KENT-My question is directed to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Is it a fact that the Trade Publicity Branch of the Department of Trade and Resources has done an excellent job promoting Australian goods overseas and that its location in Melbourne provides direct contact with manufacturing industries and suppliers? Is it also true that the Department now proposes cutting back its promotion of Australian manufactured exports, while giving more emphasis to the promotion of resources and is considering the transfer of the Trade Publicity Branch to Canberra? Can the Minister assure the House that this transfer, with its devastating effect on manufacturing industry and employment, will not be carried out and that the Trade Publicity Branch will be located permanently at the World Trade Centre where it will have direct contact with both its suppliers and industry and also operate best in terms of cost and efficiency?
Mr ANTHONY-Officers of my Department have been looking at the most suitable places for the administration of various sections, one of them being the Trade Publicity Branch. At present that has been located in Melbourne. Officers of the Department have been doing a cost-benefit evaluation. They have now brought it almost up to the stage where it is to go before the Interdepartmental Committee on Location of Australian Government Employment to see whether it can be moved to Canberra. It not only covers the interests of people in Melbourne but it

Questions without Notice

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1517

also covers the interests of people all around Australia. When the LAGE Committee has looked at the matter it will be in a position to make a final decision. As honourable members wi1l be aware, the Department of Trade and Resources has taken offices in the World Trade Centre in Melbourne. It will be locating its operations for Victoria in that building but as far as the trade promotion section is concerned, a decision wi1l be made after a complete evaluation of the cost benefits is undertaken and staff organisations are consulted.
INDICATIVE PLANNING COUNCIL
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- For the information of honourable members. I present the 1982 report of the Indicative Planning Council for the housing industry. This report, however, should be read in the context of the Budget announcements by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in August this year.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Uren) adjourned.
NATIONAL ABORIGINAL SPORTS FOUNDATION
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the National Aboriginal Sports Foundation for 1980-81.
TAX AVOIDANCE SCHEMES
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I seek leave to table six documents. They come in the wake of a question I asked the Prime Minister yesterday in relation to a Mr Denis Horgan being involved in at least five tax defaulting companies in three States and transactions involving Mr Brian Maher. They concern Treamog Pty Ltd of Victoria, in which both parties have been involved; Latem Pty Ltd in New South Wales, in which both parties were again involved; H.B.D. Holdings Pty Ltd in Western Australia, in which both parties were again involved; Henderson Investments Pty Ltd, in which both parties were involved; and Norwood Investments Pty Ltd, in which both parties were again involved. Several of these company registration documents refer to Mr Woss who at one stage was a member of the finance committee of the Western Australian Liberal Party.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not entitled to make a statement, merely to give a description.

Mr HAYDEN-It is relevant to describe the final paper. It is a copy of a letter from the Western Australian division of the Liberal Party of Australia. Its heading contains a list of people who are members of the finance committee, including Mr Woss and Mr D. B. Horgan as chairman.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Sir James Killen-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The usual practice, as the honourable gentlemen would know, is that before seeking to table papers an opportunity should be provided for--
Mr HAYDEN-I am sorry. I had not realised that.
Sir James Killen-I would be grateful to the honourable gentleman--
Mr HAYDEN-I am very happy to provide them. As distinct from incorporating documents in Hansard, when one usually extends that courtesy, I understood that the tabling of documents was straightforward.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is granted.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland has indicated to me that he claims to have been misrepresented.
Mr Morris-Yes, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-Does he wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr Morris-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-On page 1474 of yesterday's Hansard the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) is reported as saying:
The honourable member for Shortland is guilty of a total misinterpretation of that matter.
He was referring to my statement to the House on 9 September 1982. On 3 November 1977 the Minister was asked about transactions relating to the purchase of land for the Omega site. I quote his precise words from the Hansard of 3 November 1977. He said:
Let me assure the House that I have no knowledge of the activities of the Department of Administrative Services. That Department is totally independent of my Department.
He accused me yesterday of being guilty of a total misinterpretation of the matter. He went on to say that he had answered the matter. He said:
I have never deniedI made it plain to the honourable member for Shortland at the time-that I had been in touch with the Secretary of the Department of Administrative Services.

15 I8 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Personal Explanations

The facts are these: The question I asked and which he answered was raised on 3 November 1977. I have quoted to the House the answer he gave. Three questions and four days later, on 7 November 1977, having learned that the Minister for Administrative Services, Senator Withers, who had no love for the Country Party, had made the files available to the Opposition he then changed his tune. The Minister's accusation yesterday that I was guilty of misleading the House is totally inaccurate. He misled the House. The Hansard record shows that.
The second point is that he claimed that on the matter of the price of land I was guilty of misleading the House because I had him quoted completely out of context. He went on to say in reference to the land that I had said:
The second count on which the Minister misled the house was his claim that the price paid for the Omega land was the price recommended by the taxation valuer, and his claim that the land had already been acquired.
I did not mislead the House. I quoted again from an advice prepared at that time for the Minister for Administrative Services dated I November 1977 over the signature of Mr F. L. Ahrens, the First Assistant Secretary. In respect of this subject. The advice reads:
The land for the OMEGA installation has not yet been acquired.
The price negotiated with the owners is slightly higher than the independent valuation provided by the Valuation Section of the Australian Taxation Office.
I did not mislead the House. I produced the Hansard and the minutes of the Department. The responsibility is on the Minister for Primary Industry to report accurately and truthfully to this House. The record shows that he has not.
Mr NIXON-(Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr NIXON-Absolutely.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr NIXON-The honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) is recounting the same mistake that he made on 9 September. Let me put the record straight. It is true that yesterday in the course of the debate on the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill after the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) had talked about this subject. I sought to explain the facts of the matter. The honourable member for Shortland made three points on the issue.
Dr Jenkins-Why are you so waffiy about it?

Mr NIXON-I will get to it. Just leave me. Let me find the place. First, the honourable member claimed that I misled the House on 3 November 1977 when in answer to a question from him I stated in part that I had no knowledge of the activities of the Department of Administrative Services.
The honourable member for Shortland got all hot under the collar about that. He was provided with files by the Minister for Administrative Services which showed that I had been in contact with the Secretary to the Department of Administrative Services. I repeat: I have never denied that. I made that perfectly plain in answer to a question put to me by the honourable member for Shortland on 7 November 1977. I stated:
I make no secret of the fact that I did ring the Secretary of the Department of Administrative Services-
I went on to explain why. I stated:
I did ring the Secretary of the Department of Administrative Services because of reports which appeared in the local newspapers in Gippsland to the effect that the Department was seeking to purchase land on which to site the Omega station. I sought from the head of the Department of Administrative Services an assurance that speculators could not get into the area ahead of the Department with the result that the land values would become unreal.
I cannot think of a more proper reason to ring the Department of Administrative Services. I said that at that time. The honourable member for Shortland tried also to make some intrigue of the fact that I suggested that a local stock and station agent might be involved in the purchase. Again, I answered this in the Parliament on 4 November 1977. I made representations on behalf of a local stock and station agent who had been in touch with me. I find nothing improper about people coming to me as the local member asking that representations be made so that they are given an opportunity to join as an agent in the purchase of the land. I handled that in the normal traditional way-even in the way that the honourable member with the moustache might have handled it.
The honourable member for Shortland is guilty of misleading the House on the price matter. He has quoted me completely out of context. He said on 9 September 1982:
The second count on which the Minister misled the House was his claim that the price paid for the Omega land was the price recommended by the Taxation valuer, and his claim that the land had already been acquired.
That is a total distortion of what I told the Parliament. I stated on 3 November 1977:
The price finally agreed upon was not the price Mr McDonald asked for but the price that the taxation valuer recommended to the Department of Administrative Services ought to be accepted.

Standing Committee on Expenditure

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1519

That is totally different from what the honourable member for Shortland said. The fact that my response on 3 November 1977 was correct is borne out in a report by the Chief Property Officer of the Victorian branch to the Minister for Administrative Services, dated 27 July 1977, in which he stated--
Dr Theophanous-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Minister is repeating the statements he made yesterday on that same matter. He is not giving any new material in explanation. I was here yesterday when he made these points and he is simply repeating them.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The Minister is in order and he may proceed.
Mr NIXON-The report stated:
. . it is considered that payment of the asking price of $164,000 is justified. The taxation valuer has strongly recommended purchase at this figure.
The final point he makes relates to some quibble he has as to whether the land was actually acquired when I gave my answer on 3 November 1977. The fact is that the honourable member for Shortland cannot even read Hansard accurately because at no stage did I ever state that the land had been acquired. I stated that the land had been purchased for the sum of $190 an acre. I ask the honourable member for Shortland to get his facts straight.
MEDICAL FRAUD
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister for Health has indicated to me that he wishes my indulgence to clarify and add to an answer that he gave at Question Time.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I spoke of a report being leaked to a newspaper in connection with an inquiry by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts some honourable members may have gained the impression that I was suggesting that members of that Committee or any particular person associated with the Committee might have been responsible for the leak. Certainly there was leakage of a document to a newspaper, a document which was made available to the Committee. I did not wish to suggest in any way who might have been responsible for that leak. I was certainly not intending any slight on the members of that Committee.
SPECIAL PROSECUTORS BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXPENDITURE
Mr LUSHER(Hume)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Expenditure, I present the report of the Committee entitled 'Taxation Expenditures', together with the transcript of evidence, copies of the minutes of proceedings and copies of submissions authorised for publication by the Committee.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr LUSHER-by leave-The report of the Standing Committee on Expenditure on taxation expenditure is a sequel to our highly regarded earlier report entitled 'Parliament and Public Expenditure'. In that report the Committee recommended that the Government prepare and publish program statements. The thinking behind that recommendation was the need for program information which would lead to a better understanding in the Parliament and the community about what governments are trying to achieve by spending taxpayers' money. The Government accepted that recommendation.
The taxation expenditures report complements the recommendation on program statements. That recommendation sought information on the direct expenditure on the outlay side of the Budget. This report seeks information on indirect expenditures on the revenue side of the Budget. Tax expenditures and Budget outlays are different sides of the same public sector expenditure coin. Both represent calls on the Budget. While the Budget papers have provided more information on such expenditures in recent years, there is still insufficient information on tax expenditures.
While the report itself accepts the qualifications placed on tabling such expenditures, I point out to honourable members that these expenditures were properly in excess of $6 billion in 1981-82, or more than 15 per cent of Budget outlays in that year. The 1982-83 Budget Paper No. I included the Treasury submission to the Expenditure Committee inquiry. The publication of the submission represents an improvement over the information provided in the past. The Parliament should not be expected to have to obtain information in this way on an annual basis.
The thrust of our report is, therefore, information orientated. We do not seek information for its own sake. We do believe that comprehensive information will assist the Government, the Parliament and the public to examine taxation expenditures and to test, among other things, the need for particular taxation expenditures, their appropriate size, the effectiveness of a particular

1520 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Standing Committee on Expenditure

taxation expenditure in meeting its objectives and the appropriateness of taxation expenditures as an alternative to direct outlays.
Let me mention briefly some of the recommendations. First, we seek a commitment from the Government to provide the Parliament with comprehensive information on tax expenditures within three years from the tabling of this report. We think this time period is a reasonable one. Second, we ask that all taxation expenditure items, together with their objectives, be listed in the Budget Papers. Third, we ask that for the major taxation expenditures the estimated cost to revenue be given for the Budget year that is current and the two preceding years. Fourth, we recommend that individual taxation expenditure items be classified in functional groupings similar to the classification of direct outlays. To give all this work priority and status we also recommend that information on taxation expenditures be presented as a separate Budget statement in the Budget Papers. The Government itself has proposed including a financial impact statement in a Minister's second reading speech on a Bill. Our final recommendation is that where a Bill relates to taxation expenditures, the Government incorporate an explanation as to why the taxation system is preferred to a direct outlay.
As mentioned, the report is information orientated and advances the cause of accountability to the Parliament. What should not be lost sight of, however, is the use of this information for government itself in the budgetary process. In respect to taxation expenditures, Treasury says:
There is not the same kind of formalised process for an overall review in this area as there is on the outlay side.
There should be an equal scrutiny of government expenditures irrespective of how they are funded-through the personal income tax system or through direct outlays or both.
This inquiry was conducted by a sub-committee of the Expenditure Committee and I thank all members of the sub-committee for their participation in the inquiry. Those members are the honourable members for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite), Parramatta (Mr John Brown), Hunter (Mr Robert Brown), Berowra (Dr Edwards), Shortland (Mr Morris) and Barker (Mr Porter). I also thank Professor Russell Mathews for his assistance in the informal discussions we had with him; Dr D. W. Stammer, the general adviser to the Committee; and Mr Adrian Scott, who was secretary to the sub-committee. Implementation of the earlier recommendation on program statements and the acceptance of the recommendations in this report on taxation expenditures

should enable Parliament to better examine extremely large areas of public sector expenditure. I believe such information is of much greater relevance to the work of the Parliament in scrutiny of the Executive and the Administration than narrower inquiries which deal with discrete areas of public sector activities. I commend the report to the House.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter)-by leave-The report of the Standing Committee on Expenditure on taxation expenditure which has just been tabled should be compulsory reading for all members of the Parliament. I do not overemphasise its importance. It impinges directly on the whole question of the budgetary process of budgetary control and financial management and on taxation incentives and concessions of various kinds. I endorse the tabling speech of the Chairman of the Expenditure Committee, the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher). In particular I endorse his appreciation of the assistance of the sub-committee members and especially of the excellence of the assistance of Mr Adrian Scott, who was secretary to the subcommittee. I also commend the various government organisations for the high quality of their submissions.
Each year in the United States, in addition to the conventional Budget, Congress considers a taxation expenditure Budget which provides an annual costing of those expenditures and, in addition, estimates of the distributional impact of those expenditures across income classes. In other words, estimates are provided to indicate who benefits and to what extent. It is essential that similar information be provided to this Parliament. While the standard and the breadth of information on taxation expenditure provided in our Budget has increased, it has been provided only as an appendix to Budget Paper No.4 and in the current Budget about 35 per cent of taxation expenditures are not costed at all. The costs of the other 65 per cent are outdated. In no case is a costing provided for the current year.
The direct link between some taxation expenditures and many forms of tax avoidance and tax evasion schemes has been well established. I am deeply concerned about the scope of tax avoidance provided by the misuse of the various industry incentive and assistance schemes. I believe that the abuse of many rural assistance schemes in tax avoidance will finally prejudice the operation and the continuation of those schemes. The sheer size and complexity of the Income Tax Assessment Act means that smart accountants can find loopholes. In fact, a bulldozer could be driven

Standing Committee on Expenditure

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1521

through most of the provisions which are related to taxation expenditures.
One important aspect of taxation expenditures, with which the report does not deal, is their distributional impact. This may be considered to be a serious deficiency but if the report achieves, as it must, the implementation of its specific recommendations, the Parliament will have taken a major step down the track towards a more adequate presentation of information which is critical to the budgetary process and public sector financing. Professor Mathews has drawn attention to this important aspect of the taxation system and the way in which it can erode and is eroding the effectiveness and the equity of the system. It is not just that some forms of taxation expenditures provide greater benefit to higher income earners because of the progressive nature of the tax system. It is also abundantly obvious that taxation expenditures provide sectional benefits which are not always balanced and which can and do distort the equity of the system not only when they are rorted but also when they are applied and used as they were intended to be applied and used.
A closer analysis of taxation expenditures and a closer scrutiny of them by this Parliament and the community must increase our concern not only about the equity of the system but also about its potential for a complete breakdown. This has been more than adequately shown by events of recent months. A number of major reports have expressed similar concerns-in particular, the Mathews report of the Committee of Inquiry into Inflation and Taxation of May 1975 and the report of the Asprey Taxation Review Committee of January 1975. Why, in the light of these reports and of the growing and deep concern about the whole of the taxation system has no serious approach been made to a necessary and complete restructuring and simplification of the tax system? All we do is compound its complexity and seek to plug loopholes.
Another very serious matter is the way in which the Australian Taxation Office has been required, in effect, to assume the responsibility for administering programs which should be administered by Commonwealth departments directly responsible for those areas. The primary function of the Taxation Office should be in the area of efficient administration of the taxation collection function. It should not be responsible for the administration of Government programs which are provided for by the non-collection of tax. The Department of Treasury, in its Taxation Expenditures Appendix to Budget Paper No. 4 of this year's Budget Papers, states:

It would be possible to replace most of the tax provisions mentioned below with a direct expenditure program having an almost identical impact on both Budget and taxpayer.
We might well ask why this is not done. In many cases the community would be aghast at what would be disclosed. Taxation expenditures are a very convenient way to camouflage or hide the size and the impact of Government programs and the incidence of taxation concessions of various kinds. In 1979-80 identified taxation expenditures amounted to $1,769m. This report which has just been tabled shows that the total can now be put at over $6,000m, or more than 15 per cent of Budget outlays in 1981-82. The application of a similar total to this year's Budget outlays raises the total of those outlays from $47,067m to at least $53,067m and raises the proportion of gross domestic product represented by total Budget outlays this year from 28.7 per cent to 32.4 per cent.
I do not suggest that there is a simple one for one relationship between $1 of taxation expenditure and $1 of direct expenditure, but those comments I have made at least indicate the scale of this issue. It is a matter of major significance and it has very serious implications in many areas. The implementation of any government's fiscal assistance programs through the medium of taxation expenditures must also create enormous administrative and program control problems within departments responsible for administering other forms of assistance which involve direct outlays. I am sure we would be fascinated to see the mechanisms adopted to ensure appropriate coordination of taxation expenditures with direct outlays. I am equally sure that in most cases it would prove to be a hit or miss arrangement.
I now refer particularly to the likely effects of one form of taxation expenditure. It is often assumed that with the introduction of accelerated depreciation provisions, what revenue loses in one year it will gain in another. In Attachment B of the very valuable Treasury submission a more likely scenario is described in which the revenue effects of accelerated depreciation are far greater in later years than in the first few years. As a result, with provisions of this kind governments may wittingly or unwittingly be destroying their own revenue bases as the costs continue indefinitely and year after year become progressively greater. In the light of all of these considerations the perennial problem of government budgeting may lie less with the alleged restraints on the direct expenditure side. Rather, it may be found in large part in the adoption by governments of taxation expenditure programs which progressively destroy their own revenue base and which, I again emphasise, simply are not costed. I conclude by

1522 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Standing Committee on Expenditure

asking: What attention have the Government and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) given to the implications oftaxation expenditures?
Mr PORTER (Barker)-by leave-The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Expenditure, in tabling the Committee's report on taxation expenditures, outlined the purpose of the report. He identified that taxation expenditures and Budget outlays are different sides of the same public sector expenditure coin. In other words, Budget outlays are the expenditure of money collected by the Government while taxation expenditures involve money which would otherwise be collected by the Government. The purpose of the Committee's report is to bring to the Government's attention the need to review from time to time taxation expenditures or special tax concessions in order to see that they are the most efficient way of meeting the intended objectives. A precise definition of 'taxation expenditure' is not easy to find. It is referred to in the 1981-82 Budget which, in part, states:
Individuals and businesses derive financial benefits from taxation concessions of various kinds. In the year(s) when they have effect, the concessions reduce, or delay, collections of taxation revenue, and are as much a call on the Budget as are direct outlays. They are comparable in other ways also with direct outlays and are often referred to as 'taxation expenditures'.
Not all concessions, however, are tax expenditures. I think most would agree that investment allowances, for example are considered to be tax expenditures, but the allowance of accounting depreciation is not. The concern which stimulated the Committee's interest in this matter was a belief that the Government tended to pay more attention to outlays in the budgetary process than it did to taxation expenses. This view was confirmed by Mr Stone, the head of Treasury, when giving evidence to the Committee. I do not want to deal in detail with the points made by the Chairman of the Committee in tabling this report. However, if more information is provided I believe the Government and this Parliament will be better able to assess properly the demands made on the Federal coffers and the decisions which are subsequently made and incorporated in the annual Budget.
I add one further point by way of explanation. Under the heading 'Evaluation of Taxation Expenditures', the report gives some reasons why taxation expenditures ought to be reviewed. One of the points made in paragraph 34 on page 7 of the report is:
There is a clear link between taxation expenditures and tax avoidance, which makes it difficult for governments, the Parliament, and the public generally to recognise the overall impact taxation expenditures have on the tax system.

In my view that overstates the case. The formal evidence before the Committee does not support such a strong assertion. Whilst I did not believe that it was a point of sufficent significance to lodge a dissenting report I take this opportunity of explaining my position. The most relevant formal evidence for the proposition came from Mr Stone, the head of Treasury. I quote from his evidence at page 300 of the Hansard. He said:
I think it follows that where one has a directly administered outlay, expenditure, program being administered by a department of state, and assuming that department has the resources appropriate to administer the program, then one can be reasonably confident in Australia, I think, that the program is in fact being directed to the people to whom it is intended, by the government of the day, to be directed. I do not want to imply that when one looks at the tax expenditure side of things that is not the case, but I think we would all be familiar from common everyday experience that because of the nature of the administrative checks-or if you like, the non-checkswhich are part of the enormous administrative process that the Australian Taxation Office carries out day by day, it is not possible to be sure, to be as confident that those programs are reaching only the people to whom they are directed. Obviously they will be reaching those people-assuming the people make claims and there is no reason to assume that they would not-but there are also usually some grounds for thinking that there are some additional recipients of that program who are in fact claiming and who are not being picked up in the administrative processes, because that is the nature of those processes. When one thinks about the costs of direct administration on the one hand and the costs of indirect administration on the other, one also has to bear in mind the qualification I have just mentioned.
The transcript continues:
Mr PORTER-That is really saying that we spend a lot more time looking after the dollars we spend than we spend on the dollars that we are not collecting.
Mr Stone-Perhaps it is another way of saying-as my colleague, the Commissioner, has often said-and I think he said it in a reference that became public recently, that in the end of work of an office of taxation in pursuit of compliance matters is in effect never-ending. There is a 'bottomless pool', I think were the words he used, of compliance activity which he could engage in if he was allowed to devote limitless resources to doing so. In the end, there is an administrative judgement involved and, if you like, a policy judgment on the part of the government of the day as to the extent to which resources will be devoted to that kind of work. The point that you have made to me, I think, really comes back in the end to the area of compliance.
In addition to that evidence I am sure that the Committee was influenced by the informal advice given to it by Professor Russell Mathews. However, I maintain that to say there is a clear link between expenditure and tax avoidance overstates the case. I believe that it is more accurate to say that there is likely to be some avoidance in some areas of tax expenditure. Otherwise I believe that the report is a useful contribution. I hope the Government will seriously consider its recommendations.

Standing Committee on Expenditure

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1523

Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-by leave-As a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure I would like to support the recommendations of the Committee on this inquiry. I would have preferred that the inquiry had been of a broader nature. I would have preferred that evidence had been invited publicly from industry, from the beneficiaries and from the recipients of the various forms of taxation expenditure. That would have fleshed out our consideration of the cost, nature and usefulness or otherwise of the items of taxation expenditure. In essence the report shows that when taxation expenditures are introduced into the Parliament for consideration the Parliament is, in effect, conned.
In the Budget Papers information is provided which purports to be the cost for part of a year-if it is Budget time-of the proposed item of taxation expenditure as well as the purported cost for the following full year. From there on no other information is provided to Parliament and, to the best of our knowledge, from the inquiry made by the Committee, there is little machinery available to ensure that there is an accurate costing of the cost to revenue of the various items of taxation expenditure. Arising from that we then have a very distorted public debate about items of public sector expenditure. In relation to the visible items, let us look at social welfare payments. Some $10 billion of expenditure on social welfare is contained in this year's Budget. Those items are clearly visible. They are analysed and argued about. The debate is distorted. But, on the other hand, the invisible expenditure, the loss to public revenue, as the report shows, of some $6 billion, is not argued about, examined or analysed. Arising from this distorted and imbalanced debate we then have decisions by government and political parties which in many ways disadvantage sections of the community and industry because of that lack of balance and proper appreciation.
So we should ask the question: Why is not that information available on items that are associated with taxation expenditure? The nub of the matter is that successive governments have not given sufficient priority to providing resources to the Treasury and the Australian Taxation Office so that they can carry out the examination and prepare the costings and the estimates that are required. I shall quote briefly from evidence given by the Secretary to the Department of the Treasury, Mr John Stone, to the Committee on 26 May. In response to questions about the lack of information on the cost of taxation expenditure on a year by year basis and his experiences he said:

Basically, we are contending with a database problem for all the reasons that have been stated. In the end the Parliament will decide what it wants in this area. When those decisions are made, as long as resources are provided to enable them to be met, no doubt those requirements can and certainly will be met.
The cause of the whole problem of lack of information is that governments have not seen fit to provide information to the Parliament.
The other matter which arises out of this problem and which is of wide public concern is the responsibility for information provided in the Budget Papers. In recent months there has been a running public debate about rubbery figures contained in the Budget. We dealt specifically with the figures in relation to taxation expenditures. But the same comment and the same criticism applies and that is: Who is responsible for the information provided in the Budget Papers? Is it the Treasury or is it the Government? In response to questions on this matter, again to the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Stone, he said:
I am simply making a flat and simple statement that the Budget Papers tendered to the Parliament are tendered by the Treasurer. They are his responsibility; they are his papers. He has officials prepare them under his direction. Therefore the content of those papers is his decision, as it should be.
The responsibility for lack of resources lies with the government of the day. The responsibility, under the present arrangements under the present Government, for the content of the Budget Papers lies with the Treasurer (Mr Howard). We believe he has the responsibility now, in line with the modest recommendations of the Committee, to pick up those recommendations and to provide Parliament with information on the costs of taxation expenditure, not only for the year in question but also for the preceding two years. I believe that the reforms we have recommended are modest and long overdue but they are positive. They will be a barrier to manipulation of taxation concessions and expenditures. They will lead to a more equitable taxation system. They will lead to a more equitable and efficient use of taxation expenditure.
I also join previous speakers who are members of the Committee in thanking the staff of the Committee, particularly Adrian Scott, for the very valuable work and assistance they gave to the Committee.
DEATH OF MR BASHIR GEMAYEL
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-by leave-I wish to express profound regret on behalf of the Government on the death of the President-elect of Lebanon, Mr Bashir Gemayel. Mr Gemayal's death at the hands of assassins is not only a personal tragedy

1524 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Death ofMr Bashir Gemayel

for his family and a severe blow to his supporters, but also a serious setback in the search for peace in Lebanon. Reconciliation between political and religious groups is essential to any restoration of peace and national unity in Lebanon. Presidentelect Gemayel's death will greatly add to the difficulties of achieving this objective. The Australian Government is deeply concerned at the continuing violence and loss of life in Lebanon. We continue to hope that the disputes affecting that war-torn country can be settled by peaceful means and urge all parties involved to co-operate in working towards this goal.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-The Middle East has been the sad focus of world attention for too long. In more recent times that attention has been rivetted, and more sorrowful, on developments there because of the extraordinary extent of the disorder, destruction and death which have been occurring. All of this is added to in the most shocking way by the news of the apparent assassination of Mr Bashir Gemayel, President-elect of Lebanon, and, even worse, the death apparently of another 50 to 60 people who were in the same building as Mr Gemayel at the time of his slaughter.
I met Mr Gemayel when I visited the Middle East on the last occasion in 1980. I visited the Lebanon and I took the opportunity of meeting a broadly representative group of people from the various factions which existed then and still exist in that unhappy country. The late Mr Bashir Gemayel was one of them. What was dramatically illustrated to me in a very physical sense was the accuracy of so much of what I was aware of in relation to the problems of the Middle East, especially Lebanon, from my reading of the developments of difficulties there. I have said many times, and so have many other people, that a necessary precondition to a settlement of the difficulties in the Middle East and specifically to the tensions in the Lebanon is a requirement that the Palestinian issue be resolved. I have never suggested that it is the sole precondition-far from it. The situation in the Lebanon today dramatises that in the most depressing way.
The demographic developments in the last two to three decades have created a change in the balance between the Christian and Muslim groups of that population and yet the constitution has failed to make the appropriate adjustment-not that I would suggest it could be easily achieved. A consequence of that is a quite nasty tension existing between some of the representatives of the

Christian population and some of the representatives of the muslim population. Therein lies a political conundrum which it seems to me is almost of irresolvable proportions. It would seem from some of the reports which we have received in relation to the death of Mr Bashir Gemayel that even within the Christian Falange there are factions, conflicts and tensions and that these may have even contributed to his brutal death. What I am saying really is that, at this distance, we contemplate with great compasion in our hearts and a heavy sadness in our mind developments which are taking place there and at the same time endure the frustration of wondering what can be done from this part of the world to try to bring a resolution to the dreadful problems there.
I do not think this is the occasion for me to commence exploring some of the possibilities which I believe must be attempted. I do note for the record, however, that there have been some encouraging developments. For the first time the Arabs have presented a united front and indicated a willingness to recognise Israel. That I believe to be an extremely important advance on the situation which had existed hitherto.
I express concern at the way in which Israel has apparently been sucked in deeper to this vortex of conflict within the Lebanon by, according to news this morning, entering Beirut. As one with a very deep affection, although not an uncritical affection for Israel, I must declare my worry at the way in which developments in the Lebanon involving Israel have undoubtedly impaired important aspects of her standing and influence internationally, but an even greater worry about what this deeper involvement will impose on an economy which is already presented with extraordinary difficulties. I understand Israel has a rate of inflation of 130 per cent and an exchange rate which is rapidly adjusted in a way which, in the long term, cannot help that country. It has a command over resources for military purposes which deprives the expectations or the aspirations of the community for its civilian needs. All of these things in the long term must add to the crucible of discontent which I witnessed myself on my last visit to Israel and which I see confirmed in the newspapers-the crucible of discontent which must worsen as time goes by unless there is a dramatic change in the policies in the Middle East.
I return to the main purpose of the statements here this morning; that is, to express extreme sorrow and shock on the occasion of and at the nature of the death of Mr Bashir Gemayel and of those unfortunate 50 to 60 people who were in the building at the same time. Indeed, I express my sorrow for the many thousands and thousands of

Death ofMr Bashir Gemayel

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1525

people who have lost their lives in that great reservoir of blood that has been spilt in the Middle East for too long.
Mr JULL (Bowman) -by leave-I too wish to express my sincere regret at the untimely assassination of Mr Bashir Gemayel, the President-elect of the Lebanon. In April of this year six members of this House visited the Lebanon as observers to the first international conference of solidarity with the Lebanon. During our visit we had the opportunity to speak to all members of Lebanese factions within their communities in Beirut. The thing that struck our group more than anything else was that wherever we went there seemed to be a feeling of hopelessness about the future of the Lebanon. So many of the leaders in that strifetorn city really could not know which way their future was going. It was different with Bashir Gemayel. He was a young man. He was only 34 years of age. He was a man with extensive legal training. He had been educated and, in fact, had worked in the United States of America. Admittedly he had gone back and taken his part in the bloody civil war of the mid-1970s, but he struck us as the only man in that country who really had a vision of what could have been achieved. He was prepared to work and to dedicate his life in trying to get back some sort of reunification of his beloved Lebanon.
It was interesting that when we spoke to the leaders of the other Moslem factions in West Beirut and put the question to them as to whether they may be able to work together with Bashir Gemayel in a Christian-headed government they admitted-admittedly after probing questioning -that they could. I believe that although there have been many other aspects surrounding the conflict in recent times in the Lebanon there was a feeling of hope with the emergence of Bashir Gemayel to the position of President-elect. There was a deal of hope that perhaps the people could get back together in the Lebanon in that cradle of democracy and human rights that has existed for so many hundreds of years to try to take their place once again in a peaceful world. I suppose to many of us that dream has been shattered with the untimely passing of Bashir Gemayel. It was the third attempt on his life. He had known great tragedy. His young daughter died in a previous assassination attempt on his life. It is tragic to think that after the troubles he had been through he had to meet his end in this way.
Bashir Gemayel has been accused of being many things, but he was very much a patriot for the Lebanon. He was very much a man who was prepared to dedicate himself to the reunification of that great country-a country that has indeed

shown the world how people of different races and different religions have been able to live together for many hundreds of years. One can only hope that in the coming weeks and days another strong leader will emerge in the Lebanon who has the capacity to weld all those different groups together so that at last the people of Lebanon can live in a lasting and meaningful peace.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta)-by leave-I would like to add a few words to the sentiments expressed by honourable members who have spoken regarding the tragic death of the President-elect of Lebanon. The death of President-elect Gemayel comes at a time when the world at last had started to believe that an end could come to the years of war in Lebanon. Like the honourable member for Bowman (Mr lull), I was fortunate enough to meet Mr Gemayel in April when I joined the delegation to the Lebanon. We were there before the Israeli invasion. I remember Beirut, formerly well described as the Paris of the East, as a city not only wracked by war but also ruled by anarchy. Every faction had its own roadblock and a roadblock was set up every hundred yards.
The tragedy of Lebanon is probably best epitomised to me by a soldier who stopped our car for inspection. In one hand he held a Kalashnikov automatic rifle, he had a pistol at his waist and hand grenades at his belt. In the other hand he held a small canary. He was talking to the bird with great affection; in fact, he was feeding the bird from his lips while his fingers were on the trigger of the Kalashnikov. He would not have been a day over 14. I told Mr Gemayel of my strange encounter. He replied with great feeling that of course it was the tragedy of a civil war that such young children became heroes in a cause that they could not even understand. The optimism of Gemayel was overpowering. In the midst of the civil war he was telling us of his dream. He dreamed of a Lebanon where Christians and Moslems lived in peace; he dreamed of a Lebanon which belonged to the Lebanese; he dreamed of a Lebanon which was clear of invading forces; he dreamed of a future which seemed closer than ever, but which, unfortunately he will never experience.
I condemn this vicious attack on the lives of innocent people which has caused the death of a young man-potentially a great man-who dared to dream of a Lebanon united and free, and who dared to attempt to make his dream a reality for the country and the people he loved so dearly. I join the 200,000 Lebanese Australians who are living in this country in expressing my sorrow

1526 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Death ofMr Bashir Gemayel

upon the death of President-elect Bashir Gemayel. The joy which these people experienced in the last couple of weeks with the elevation of this fine man to the President-elect position in Lebanon has been shortlived. Only two weeks ago I attended a function in Sydney with the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock), the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) and the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman). The joy which those Lebanese people exhibited that day, that at last they had a man with the capacities of Gemayel to lead their country out of gloom, has been shortlived and destroyed by an assassin's hand. I only hope that the Lebanese people will be able to find a person of equal stature and decency perhaps to lead them from the despair which they have suffered for so many years.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell)-by leave-Only in the last few weeks with the election of Mr Bashir Gemayel did there appear to be any possibility of eventual stability and peace in Lebanon. Great hopes were held for improved conditions following the election of Bashir Gemayel. His determination for peace and democracy are best illustrated in a speech he made in April. He said:
We are extending our hands to the lebanese Moslems as well as to two foreigners on Lebanese territory.
The two foreigners he referred to where at that time the Syrians and the Palestinians. He continued:
However, our hands will only be extended to the foreigners in order to negotiate their swift departure from Lebanon.
He had a fierce pride and sense of freedom. He possessed a strong and likeable personality and was regarded with respect by practically all factions of politics in Lebanon. His death is a tragedy for the peace and stability of Lebanon. His supporters and family are grief stricken. The senseless killing of Bashir Gemayel is a serious setback to peace in Lebanon and the Middle East. I support the condolences expressed by the Australian Government.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-by leave-I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). As spokesman for the Opposition in matters of foreign policy I join in expressing my party's condolences to the people of Lebanon at the death of the Presidentelect. We know that Lebanon has suffered repeatedly at the hands of warring factions. Its capital, Beirut, has been destroyed twice in recent times. We were hopeful that the nomination of President-elect Gemayel was the first step in a long road to political normality. But the criminal act of his assassination will have deep political repercussions. We hoped that the President-elect

would have been able to unite the various groups, Christian and Moslem, to bring about a national reconciliation and restore Lebanon to its former prosperity without continued interference by foreign forces. We know and we hope that the Lebanese people will continue to display the courage required to choose a successor to their President and to ensure that further murder and bloodshed are avoided.
Mr COHEN (Robertson)-by leave-I add my sentiments to the condolences which have been expressed. Bashir Gemayel was a man who held hope for Lebanon. We hoped that someone would emerge in these very troubled times to unite the people of Lebanon. He has been described variously by terms such as right wing and ruthless. I think those terms are very unfair in the political climate of Lebanon. In the last seven and a half years in that tragic country over 100,000 people died, before the commencement of the present war which broke out a couple of months ago. Bashir Gemayel reflected the times in which he lived. He was only 34 when he died. If the term 'ruthless' could have been applied to him, it could have been applied probably to almost every individual who led a faction. There are so many factions in the Lebanon that the difficulty in uniting it is almost impossible. There were three groups of Christians under Major Haddad, the Chamouns and the Gemayels. There were 15 different factions of the Palestine Liberation Organisation and the Shi'ite and Sunni Moslems. I have just touched the tip of the iceberg. Those factions fought and, unfortunately and tragically, they tried to destroy one another.
It was hoped, of course, that Gemayel, who led the major Christian faction, would be able to unite these groups and bring peace to this troubled country. But that is not to be. I echo the sentiments expressed by my colleagues on both sides of the House. We can only hope that somebody will emerge from amongst the various factions-probably from the same faction from which Gemayel came-who will unite the people of Lebanon once and for all and rid it of all foreign troops, Syrian and Israeli, so that once again Lebanon can become the jewel of the Middle East which it was for such a long period.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-by leave-I would like to be associated with the expressions of condolence. I know that within my own electorate many Lebanese people are deeply grieved at the tragic loss of life of the President-elect of the Lebanon. I share their grief because I have watched their personal agony as their country has been torn apart, very often as a result of the intervention of others. I know their aspirations to be

Death ofMr Bashir Gemayel

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1527

free of outside influence-the influence of the Palestinians, the Syrians and the Israelis-to be able to plan their own future. I know that this was the desire and the aspiration of the Presidentelect. It was certainly my wish that he be given the opportunity to bring to Lebanon the leadership that is so necessary and the stability that we all pray it might see. It is tragic, I think, when a person who has the capacity to bring about unity, as it appeared the President-elect was capable of doing, loses his life in such tragic circumstances. I very much grieve for Lebanon and for the Lebanese people.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland)-by leave-I seek to be associated with the expressions of condolence on the tragic death of the Lebanese President-elect, Bashir Gemayel. It is particularly tragic that a young man of 34 years of age who was prepared quite courageously to take on the national reconciliation of his country and the rebuilding of Lebanon should be taken away from the political scene. There is also the personal tragedy of his family and those close to him have suffered. It is true, as other members have said, that this war torn country has had so many other influences operating on it from the Syrians, the Palestinians and the Israelis. Finally, Lebanon was in a position where it could start the job of national rebuilding. Now the Lebanese people find that they have to seek, as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) put it, quite courageously to elect another President to start that task. I join with honourable members in this expression of condolence. I extend to the Lebanese people the very best of good wishes in terms of their future and of the person who replaces President-elect Gemayel. Perhaps for the first time in a long time it is hoped they can remove themselves from the position of conflict which they have suffered for so long.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins)-by leave-I join with other members today, on my own behalf and on behalf of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, in expressing condolences to the people of Lebanon and the family of the President-elect Gemayel on this tragic death, this tragic murder, this tragic assassination. I express my condolences to the nation of Lebanon and the hope for peace and reconciliation in that country between Christian and Christian, between Moslem and Moslem, and between Christian and Moslem.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy)-by leave-I express my regret that violence of the kind which brought about the death of President-elect Bashir Gemayel should occur anywhere in the World but it was so much more devastating in Lebanon when

it seemed that there was some possibility of peace at long last, or at least the beginnings of something that may have produced peace. A strong man who was apparently highly respected was the President-elect, and it seemed that there was hope for the future. I express on my own behalf, on behalf of the people in my electorate and Australia generally, our very deep sympathy and regret not only for the President-elect but also for the other people who were so tragically slaughtered in what was a very black day in world history.
REPLACEMENT OF OPERATING THEATRES AT REPATRIATION GENERAL HOSPITAL, DAW PARK,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Report of Public Works Committee
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the report relating to the following proposed work:
Replacement of Operating Theatres and Refurbishment of Surgical Wards at the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia.
Motion (by Mr Bungey) proposed:
That the report be printed.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker)-by leave-I am grateful to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) for granting me leave. I welcome the report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Public Works. The Daw Park Repatriation General Hospital is in my electorate. It does an excellent job for ex-servicemen, despite the large and drastic financial cuts imposed by the Government. I put in lengthy submissions on this matter as far back as 3 July 1980. The hospital staff has been pushing for some four years to get the operating theatres upgraded, which have been in operation since 1942. Those operating theatres have been a health hazard for a number of years both to staff and to patients. I welcome the report. I sincerely trust that the Committee's recommendations are given speedy endorsement by the Government.
I will take just half a minute to place on record that it is the Returned Services League, in South Australia, which must get the credit. There has been a long and consistent campaign on its part and on behalf of members and families of servicemen in South Australia to get the operating theatres completely upgraded and to refurbish the surgical wards. I place on record, on behalf of the ex-servicemen and their families in South Australia our gratitude to the President, and the Secretary, the claims officer of the RSL and in particular the South Australian Deputy Commissioner for Veterans' Affairs, Mr Bruce Rogers,

1528 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Primary Industry

and his staff for their support. I sincerely trust that the Government will get on with the job and get both facilities upgraded as quickly as possible.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PRIMARY INDUSTRY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's neglect and maladministration of Australia's stricken primary industries.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (11.57)-1 know that the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) will get very agitated about this matter of public importance, as will the Country Party members or National Party members or National Country Party members or Country Liberal Party members-whatever they call themselves. They should welcome this opportunity to talk about rural issues. Australia's farmers need all the help they can get, and from both sides of this House. The reason they will get agitated, of course, is that the National Country Party propaganda line is that all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds in the bush. The National Country Party and the Minister will say that Australia's primary industries have no problems or, if they do, it is through acts of God or it is someone else's fault. In New South Wales it is Mr Hallam's fault. In Victoria it is Mr Kent's fault. Of course, they will not mention South Australia because Mr Chapman, the Liberal Minister of Agriculture, has already said that the Minister for Primary Industry and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) are lightweights and are out of touch. Then, of course, there is the Minister's classic line: Anyone putting up a contrary view is misinformed. If his mates in the rural organisations or on the statutory marketing authorities tell him everything is all right then it is. But if rank and file farmers or members of the National Country Party tell the National Country Party Ministers that they are barking up the wrong tree then they are drongoes.
The Opposition will not take this arrogant born-to-rule nonsense. It is not the role of an Opposition to oppose everything a government does, nor is it the role of an Opposition to agree with

everything a government does. It is the role of an Opposition to speak on behalf of the rural people affected by harsh economic and climatic conditions in a deteriorating market situation. The fact is that Australia's primary industries are in a crisis. They are being hit from all sides, and the Government is dragging its feet. There is a crisis at the economic level. Interest rates are at record heights. There are problems of access to finance. There is the problem of the cost of protection of the rural exporters. There is the problem of inflation. There is a situation of dreadful industrial relations, and rural unemployment is at an unprecedented level in country areas. Which Country Party member in the Parliament has ever raised rural unemployment as an issue? The economy is in a mess. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is leading Australia into an economic disaster due to his crazy economic monetarist policies.
There is a crisis at the commodity level. One can take these commodities one by one. Sugar is in really big trouble, yet the Government is dithering on this nonsense of the Ord scheme. With dairying there was a problem through the 1960s with the European Economic Community when nothing was done. There was a severe adjustment in the 1970s and now in the 1980s we have scandals. With the canning fruit industry there was an Industries Assistance Commission inquiry after years and years. Back in 1976 the former Minister for Primary Industry was saying that there could be a private solution to this industry's problems. With small crops and horticulture we have had problems with closer economic relations and imports. There has been almost nil activity in the fishing industry. The joint fisheries authorities are still not implemented. How many more inquiries do we need on the meat industry? Eventually the request for assistance went to the lAC. What the industry wants is action.
Look at the live virus issue. There has been no decision on that by the Government. We do not even know what the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) or the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) thinks about that subject. Look at the live sheep export issue. There was head kicking and union bashing for years in the live sheep industry before the Government woke up and got down to talking about the matter. Look at the fuel policy. The legislation was introduced on Budget night. I was told we were to debate the matter this week but it has been pulled out of the legislative program again. There is all sorts of dithering. The farmers and the fishermen do not know how the rebate system is going to work.

Primary Industry

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1529

The Government has not taken any action on soil conservation or water resources. The Government has a $200m program for water resources and it has under-spent this by nearly 25 per cent. There is a crisis in administration, a hiatus, a lack of action by the Government, the Minister and the Department. We have only to point to Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd and the meat substitution scandal. As far as the rural sector is concerned the Government is falling down on the job. I am not just talking about all these matters having to be contained in the Budget. I am talking about the Government's ongoing policy. The Government-the National Country Party, and the Liberal Party-is taking the rural sector for granted. It is treating the industry with contempt in a cynical belief that the rural vote is tied up for the conservative parties.
If we rationally examine rural policy formulation by the present Government it is clear that it depends entirely on its being in government. I recently tried to get the rural policy and platform documents of the National Country Party and the Liberal Party. Eventually I got them. They are very narrow documents. The National Country Party document is a little over a page and contains 14 points-that is its platform; the Liberal Party document is a single page containing seven points. This is the rural policy of the major parties-14 points for the National Country Party and seven points for the Liberal Party. Of course, there are the policy documents and the policy speeches of the parties but they are mainly history, a catalogue of well-established programs or a couple of election goodies. This is the basic problem. The Commonwealth conservative Government does not know what its policies are until it is in government. In opposition it has nothing but attack and negativism or silly promises such as that of the Deputy Prime Minister to the effect that: 'If we do not get interest rates down by 2 per cent, I will eat my hat'. I trust he has eaten his hat because interest rates have gone up by 4 per cent. The big thing that defines which way this Government will act is the statement: 'We will not act until the industry is agreed'. In so many instances the industries will never be agreed. In so many instances the Government does not act until it can no longer decently refuse. No one disputes the point that it is logical and sensible for a government to consult or to meet the requests of an industry but a government cannot always act on that premise.
If one analyses the actions of this desperate, scandal-ridden Government as far as the rural sector is concerned it fits into a pattern. Its policy is: Never act until you have to; never act until industry agrees; never anticipate, never initiate,

never lead. This is why the Government is never able to respond quickly to a crisis. The Government depends almost entirely on departmental advice and advice from statutory marketing authorities or from organisations. There is even an inconsistency in this approach. According to the Government, if the department displeases you, your rubbish it-as the Minister did at the royal commission inquiring into meat substitution. If a government department displeases you, you can use it as a scapegoat; if there is a problem you blame the bureaucrats. I was absolutely amazed the other night to hear the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) blame the Bureau of Customs for the problem with the new diesel fuel rebate system. He said that it is not the Government that is to blame but the wicked old Bureau of Customs. That is taking ministerial irresponsibility almost to the level of an art form.
Of course, if the industry organisations ever dare to question the Government then they are rubbished as the Minister and the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) did the othet night in respect of the National Farmers Federation in saying that its election request amounted to $4,000m. The Government rubbishes the views of the NFF on the cost of protection. No doubt the National Farmers Federation will be dragged into line by its political masters. Some of the things that organisation is saying are sensible. For example, what the organisation wants in relation to drought is only a little extra money under the rural adjustment scheme. But nothing could be done.
Let us look at the sugar industry, the subject of which was raised today in this House. The Queensland National Party Minister for Primary Industries is in Canberra today to talk about the domestic sugar price problem and the plight of the sugar industry. The industry is in trouble because costs have been rising and the price dropping since October 1980. There are a number of causes for the drop in sugar prices. For a start, world production at 99 million tonnes to 100 million tonnes is 9 per cent to 10 per cent abovt; world demand. The common agricultural policy of the EEC has encouraged the growth of beet sugar which is now coming onto the world market. The EEC has stocks of 107 million tonnes. As well, the United States has imposed import quotas and an import tax and has raised the domestic price. There is also the development of high fructose corn syrup as an alternative sweetener which poses a longer term threat. Brazil's ethanol program also may release extra sugar on to world markets if it changes its level of utilisation.

1530 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Primary Industry

The free price of sugar was US40c a lb in October 1980. It was down to 6.4c a lb in July 1982. What is the Government doing about the sugar industry which is mainly in Queensland and on the north coast in New South Wales? It is supporting the Western Australian Liberal proposal to develop the Ord sugar scheme. The proposal is for 200,000 tonnes of sugar by 1985. The Prime Minister supports that. Who do I use to support that statement? Mr O'Connor, the Liberal Premier of Western Australia. He said that he was not unhappy with Mr Fraser's attitude to a proposed Ord sugar industry producing 160,000 tonnes a year. An article in the West Australian of Saturday, 11 September, states:
. . . according to Mr O'Connor the Prime Minister had said that Western Australia had the right to take part in the sugar industry and that the Federal Government could not stop it marketing its produce in Australia.
Senator Thomas, a senior Liberal Party senator, supports the Western Australian industry. In the Kimberley Echo of 23 August, 1982 Senator Thomas is reported as saying:
The Liberal Government in Western Australia is working very hard to establish a sugar industry in the Ord River Irrigation area.
That is what the Liberals are saying. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) who is at the table has said that this is not a Commonwealth matter. We have the Prime Minister saying he is in favour of the Ord sugar and the Deputy Prime Minister saying that he is against it. Of course there is a problem with the South Korean connection in trade. The Deputy Prime Minister has almost the whole of the New South Wales sugar industry in his electorate. There is no consistency in the way the Government is handling the South Korean trade problem. The Queensland Minister for Primary Industries is in Canberra today. What is he saying? Is he saying it is not a Commonwealth matter? What is the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) saying? I think it can be taken from his question in Question Time today that he is not in favour of growing sugar on the Ord. What is the honourable member for Leichhardt (Mr Thomson) saying? Is he saying that he is against growing sugar in the Ord? What about the poor old honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean)? He is a Liberal. Whom does he back? Does he back the Prime Minister or the Deputy Prime Minister on this question? What is the National Country Party doing? I am told that it is documenting the Australian Labor Party's statements against the Ord to use in Western Australia.
It is a great Country Party in Western Australia! There are actually two of them, there is

Mr Old's and the other. They are not even the rump of a rural rump. It is not a Commonwealth matter we are told. What about export licences? Surely the Commonwealth comes in there? What about the application for $23m by the Western Australian Government to the Commonwealth Government? Is that not a Commonwealth matter? What about Western Australia saying that it wants a slice of the action? If Western Australia grows sugar-and no one says that philosophically he is opposed to it; it can grown pumpkins, gum trees or whatever-it will have to be on the same grounds that sugar is grown in Queensland and New South Wales otherwise it will upset the legislative arrangements that have gone through this House year after year. What will happen then? If we put in another 160,000 tonnes or 200,000 tonnes it will simply take the money off the Queensland and New South Wales growers who are already in desperate economic trouble. It is crazy economics. It will cost about $200m for the infrastructure. The infrastructure is in place in Queensland. It is a waste of Australia's economic resources. The timing is wrong. There is no sense in the Western Australians using the argument of the Burdekin scheme, saying: 'Why can't we grow sugar here if the Queenslanders are going to grow more sugar in the Burdekin?' Growers in the Burdekin will have to go through exactly the same hoops as any other sugar cane growers in applying for a quota. The fact is that ethanol is the only sensible option for the Western Australians if they are going to grow sugar at all.
Let us look at the failure of administration in the dairy industry. Two Ministers have been shown by a Senate committee report to be culpably irresponsible-one by negligence and one by cover-up. That is indisputable. The report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations still remains. Today the Minister informed us that he has had another report from the Auditor-General. He has had it for five months and he has given an explanation to the House. But we still do not know who was responsible for the breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. We still do not know about the millions of missing dollars. We still have not had any adequate explanation of whether the Minister is responsible.
Now there all these allegations about Keban Bunga. Apparently $1 Om was offered for the Australian Dairy Corporation's share in P. T. Indomilk and $lm was paid. The Minister intervened in a purely commercial deal. All the ADC has to do is ensure the commercial viability of that deal and whether it is legal in Australia and Indonesia. This matter is going to the courts and I

Primary Industry

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1531

will not canvass it any more, but I would simply like to say that if the Business Review Weekly and the National Farmer are wrong in their rather extensive articles on this matter, 1 do not know why the Minister has not corrected them. The sale has been stopped. There has been an offer of $4.5m. The intervention by the Australian Government has cost the Australian dairy industry $5.5m. Let us get back to this ministerial responsibility and all the issues in the Asia Dairy Industries affair: The GATT breach; Hompi's Philippines plant; the Murray-Goulburn Cooperative and the problems about the product levies; the Reserve Bank concessional loans not paid back by 10 companies; no legislative backing of the Reserve Bank's loans system; My Pyle victimised as a scapegoat; files gone missing; export certificates under the GATT and the breach thereon; and last October the Department asked to report on ADI and GATT, which report is not ready yet; we have not heard anything about it.
Let us look at a few other things. Let us look at the Review of Commonwealth Functions. In March 1981 the Minister said that the farmers have too much clout in Cabinet to be disadvantaged by the razor gang. The razor gang's recommendations came down in may 1981 and they revealed the very high cost to primary producers which the Minister quickly sought to reinterpret. The sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority was the greatest joke of all time. He said that there was no rush into selling it, and all that changed there was the letterhead. He said that there was to be no cut in the Wheat Board interest rate subsidy. Then he found out there was to be one. What did he do? He blamed the Treasurer. In May 1981 when NSW producers were entering their third year of drought and rural organisations were complaining that the banks were not passing on the lower interest rate requested by the Government, the Minister said that farmers in drought declared areas would have to apply individually for the interest rate concession and any complaints should be directed to individual bank managers.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (12.12)-1 welcome this discussion of a matter of public importance proposed by the Australian Labor Party today because once again it exposes the total sham of the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) and the total

lack of policy of the ALP in respect of rural matters. I have yet to hear one speech by the honourable member for Werriwa that is not simply political. All he can do is blame the National Country Party, and then blame it again. Having no policies at all, all he comes out with is a lot of rhetoric and diatribe. He has no policy approach to the industries at all. It is no wonder that people out in the bush do not like the Labor Party. They cannot get any sense out of it, and they have not been able to get any sense out of it for seven years. The honourable member for Werriwa again today added nothing. There was not one policy declaration in the speech of the honourable member for Werriwa. I have yet to hear him make a policy declaration. He is sore from sitting on the fence; his backside is rubbed raw. He sits in the middle of the fence on every issue. He has not made up his mind about a policy issue, even in respect of the horticultural industries in his electorate which come to me to get their problems resolved because of his failure to attend to his duties. All I can say is that the honourable member for Werriwa is very disappointing on the front bench. I had thought we would hear much more from him than the sort of approach he takes to everything. He is trying to adopt tough man tactics, as though that will get him anywhere. He thinks: 'If I stand up and shout loud and long and accuse everybody, the old ALP will put me back on the front bench'. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) would eat him on policy decisions. I have heard some sensible stuff from him in his electorate. At least he has a frank approach to the industry's problems and is prepared to expound them and say what he thinks the resolution is. 1 know that that might be the kiss of death for him, but it is true.
Mr Cunningbam-You have been exposed in the bush.
Mr NIXON-Just cool down. Today the Labor Party has brought into the House complaints about the neglect and the maladministration of the stricken Australian primary industries. Even in the wording of the matter of public importance the honourable memb~r for Werriwa displays a total lack of knowledge of the primary industries. He talked about Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. Later in the day I will be tabling some papers and making a statement about that. This Government has nothing to be ashamed of in relation to Asia Dairy Industries despite all the hoo-ha of the report of a Senate committee and everything else. That will be exposed in due course. He raved about the dangers to and difficulties of the beef industry because of the beef substitution issue. The fact is

1532 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Primary Industry

that we moved so quickly on that beef substitution issue that meat was released in America within eight working days, I think, of the substitution being discovered. The price for Australian beef opened at a higher price than it was prior to the meat substitution issue. That shows how much faith the Americans had in Australia's getting the system right. The beef industry is suffering a bad downturn because of international commodity prices. That is compounded, of course, by the problems of drought. I will come to the drought later.
The fact is that we have secured access to markets in Korea and Japan and have been getting good results out of them. We fought hard for that access. The processing industry is in deep trouble. The honourable member for Werriwa chided me because I referred the processing industry to the Industries Assistance Commission. I do not know what he wants. He chides me because I do not do things and then he chides me because I do do them. I wish he would make up his mind. Then he chides me because he says I take no action unless the industry makes up its mind. Again he does not know what he is talking about. Last week when addressing the Cattlemen's Union I told the beef industry that I was sick of the organisations bringing up their own plans and fighting each other. I said that it was time they got together and that I proposed to pull them together and resolve the issues once and for all. So, I wish the honourable member for Werriwa would make up his mind.
Let us look at the different industries. The wool industry has a guaranteed minimum price. We lifted it from 410c to 422c. Perhaps he is complaining because I consulted with the industry about the level to which the price ought to be lifted. He does not seem to like these industry organisations. Apparently he does not have any plans for consultation with industry organisations, and I think industries around the country ought to be aware of that. Here is one for him-sheep meat and live sheep exports. What a lovely position he has adopted on that! No wonder he has a raw backside from sitting on the fence. He sat on the fence over the live sheep issue. Who resolved the live sheep issue? It was not the honourable member for Werriwa or the Labor Party.
Mr L1oyd-The Minister for Primary Industry.
Mr NIXON-The Minister for Primary Industry had to do it, responsibly and rightly. Whilst I might have lost a bit of skin in getting a final result, I won the war. I might have lost a battle or two on the day, but I won the war on the live sheep issue. There is no doubt about that. The

ships in Portland are loading, and Mr Wally Curran can stick that up his smoker or wherever he likes to put it. They are loading today. That is no thanks to Mr Curran and it is certainly no thanks to the Labor Party or the honourable member for Werriwa who did nothing to try to resolve the issue. They squibbed the issue entirely.
The honourable member talked about the dairy industry. The dairy industry has been through years of trauma, rationalisation and modernisation both at the grass roots level on the farm and in the factories. The dairy industry this year is likely to be the best paying rural industry of all. It is no longer the Cinderella industry. It is a modern industry. It has shaken itself out of its lethargy. It is very active in the market place. It is supported by the Government with an underwriting guarantee of 95 per cent based on the average price of the last two years and this year's price. The Government has sought to put proper and responsible stabilisation plans under each of these industries. I am proud of the fact that I have had close discussions with the industry organisations in resolving the issues relating to these industries. The dairy industry is one example in point. We have pulled it from the bottom of the heap and this year it may well be on top of the heap.
The wheat industry is another example. It has a good stabilisation scheme based on the same principle-a guaranteed minimum price of 95 per cent based on the past two years actual prices and a guesstimate of this year's price. The wheat industry knows exactly where it is going in terms of guarantees to the grower. Certainly it has great and serious difficulty because of drought. Very regrettably, the grain industry will suffer a downturn in production from about 16 million tonnes last year to less than nine million this year. I do not know what the final figure will be.
The sugar industry suffered an enormous collapse, with prices dropping in the international market place from $350 to $380 a tonne to about $130 a tonne. It is true to say that the European Economic Community and its policies have helped cause that trouble. With its high subsidies for the home market price and its subsidies on export sales it has caused massive overproduction. It is not causing problems just for Australia. I point out that Australia happens to be the most efficient sugar producing country in the world. It is a quite ridiculous for the EEC to subsidise the industry as it is, and to cause such international trouble not only for such countries as Australia but also for the Third World countries. Caribbean countries and countries that have traditionally been sugar growers have been pushed out of their traditional markets because of the policies of the

Primary Industry

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1533

EEC. Australia is one of the more efficient agricultural producers, one of the great traders in agriculture, in the world. Given a fair go we will beat anybody on the world market. The Government has sought to underpin each of these rural industries in its own way. A stabilisation plan is drawn up in consultation with the industry concerned. There is no bureaucratic nonsense about it; it is an effective, practical plan that will work. In addition to that, we seek to be flexible enough to introduce policies to meet the changed circumstance when industries run into serious difficulties.
That is what we have done in respect of the drought. The nation is facing perhaps the severest drought in its history. Certainly, if it does not rain in the next three weeks the pastoral industries will join the grain industries in being in the worst situation in the country's history. We faced up to that fact a fortnight or three weeks ago and determined two policies. After lunch I will be bringing a Bill into the House with respect to those policies. The two policies commit the Government to $300m-odd in drought aid. The first is to subsidise interest payments on debts at rates of interest exceeding 12 per cent. That is to try to help the farmer and to ensure that it is not interest rates that push him off the land. The second one is to provide a 50 per cent subsidy on purchases of fodder for livestock. That is a very important new policy commitment by the Government. It will cost some $320m. That is the sort of approach that the Commonwealth Government takes and that I take as Minister. There has to be a little flexibility to meet the needs as they arise, in addition to laying down long term plansstabilisation plans and support plans-for the industries and helping them to develop markets. It is a positive approach towards the industries.
I read to the House earlier in the day the additional core measures that we have proposed on drought. Let me repeat them in this debate. I think it is important to show what we have done. We have proposed the following changes:
The right for local governments to sink bores in central locations for water for stock, with the authorities being reimbursed the full costs, and also the cost of manning the bores where applicable.
The limits on carryon loans be raised to $40,000 or doubled whichever is the greater.
The Commonwealth will require that the money it makes available to the States for drought loans be lent by the States at no more than 4 per cent interest.
Other States should implement carryon loans for small businesses in drought declared areas under the same con~ ditions that currently apply in Queensland.
Water cartage subsidy be set at 100 per cent.
The freight subsidy on the transport of fodder and livestock be set at 7S per cent.

If the honourable member for Werriwa were genuine at least we would have heard of his having made some representations to the Minister for Agriculture in New South Wales about doing something to relaxing the stringent and miserable conditions that apply in that State. Why will the New South Wales Government not be as generous as the Queensland Government? Why will it not even be as generous as the Victorian Government? That is a Labor Government. At least I got Mr Kent to agree to introduce these changes. Why will New South Wales not be as generous as that? Why does the honourable member for Werriwa not get on to his colleague in New South Wales? Does he not have any influence at all? He has no influence at all. He cannot even talk to his own colleague in New South Wales. No wonder the New South Wales drought policy is causing great difficulty for the Livestock and Grain Producers Association of New South Wales. I can understand why members of the Association have to come to me to try to get resolution of their New South Wales problems. The Australian Labor Party is totally unsympathetic in this very serious situation. It is shameful. If the honourable member for Werriwa had any go in him at all he would be getting on to the New South Wales Minister for Agriculture and pointing out that he is responsible for the administration of drought relief and that he should be doing something about it. I fail to understand how the honourable member for Werriwa can stand in this place and talk in the way he does without trying to do something positive.
Let us see what the Government has done. Let me recount to the House just a few of the measures to show what the Government has done in respect of primary industry and to show the sham and the hollowness of the matter of public importance that was introduced by the honourable member for Werriwa today. We have set up the Primary Industry Bank of Australia; we have introduced or improved stabilisation and price support schemes for wool, wheat, fruit and dairy products; we have improved the wheat pricing and marketing arrangements; and we have continued the support for the superphosphate and nitrogenous fertiliser subsidies. What did the honourable member for Werriwa do about that? He opposed the Bill in this House with all the humbug and all the cant in the world. He had to crawl down. Finally the Labor Party and the honourable member for Werriwa had to crawl down because they had demonstrated to the rural people of Australia that they still have the same approach to the rural industry as they have always had. Their approach is to get rid of the

1534 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Petitions

superphosphate subsidy and the nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy and to bring Dr Coombs back. That is what the Labor Party would do. The honourable member for Werriwa was exposed for the first time in a true and honest fashioI' by his opposition to that Bill. What did he do? He had to withdraw. The Opposition had to climb down in the Senate and let the Bill go through. But the people in the rural areas of Australia will not forget. When the next election comes they will remember that the honourable member for Werriwa was the spokesman for the Labor Party in that debate. He typified the approach that the Labor Party takes on all rural issues. But let me not be distracted by such small matters as that; let me go on.
The Government has continued the Commonwealth's commitment to match dollar for dollar industry contributions to rural research. We have set the wool floor price at 422c a kilo clean for 1982-83; we initiated the revolving of the wool market support fund, which will payout over $46m in grower contributions from the 1975-76 collections, we have guaranteed a government contribution of $20m in 1982-83 for wool promotion; we have established the Cocos (Keeling) Islands quarantine station; and we have established the $121 m Australian National Animal Health Laboratory in Geelong. What is the Labor Party's approach to that? I have not heard a positive word about that from the honourable member. He is sitting on the fence. No wonder his bottom is raw, no wonder he is sore; he is such a fence sitter. There are pages more of the positive policies that the Government has introduced that I could read to the House but time does not permit me to do so. I dismiss the MPI as a lot of nonsense.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The Minister's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk~Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania. Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians, for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including

financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sainsbury and Mr West.
Petitions received.
Funding for Laurel Tree House, University of Sydney
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That a Federal government subsidy for the recurrent funding of Laurel Tree House, a child care centre at The University of Sydney so far denied Federal funding, should be granted immediately to make use of the centre more possible for those on low and moderate incomes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Retirement Benefits: Private Enterprise
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our concern that:
\. The Income Tax Assessment Tax Assessment Act (the Act) and its administration is inadequate in providing retirement benefits for employees in private enterprise;
2. The Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) denies deductions necessary to index retirement pensions;
3. Deductions for the self-employed and employed are inadequate;
4. The Commissioner has exercised his discretion improperly by negating a choice the Act allows on investment in Government Securities;
5. The Commissioner's constant alterations to guidelines and lack of communication has created great uncertainty.
6. The Commissioner is acting arbitrarily, and without proper notice in restricting trustees' investments with employers;
7. The Commissioner seeks to apply new actuarial guidelines retrospectively to July 1981.
Your Petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, take action to remedy these inadequacies and in particular we pray that action be taken:
(i) To ensure that the Commissioner exercises his discretion only with proper regard to legal principles;
(ii) To ensure that the Commissioner does not delegate to auditors part of his function of administering the Act;
(iii) To enact legislation allowing proper levels of retirement benefits to be provided;
(iv) To ensure that retirement benefits are regulated by a Department with a primarily social welfare function.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Macphee.
Petition received.

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1535

Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australian Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Walliso
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Burke respecfully showeth that:
I. The automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. If imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the Industry of their work opportunities. Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanouso
Petition received.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
Suspension of Standing and Sessional Orders
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveagreed to:
That so much of the Standing and Sessional Orders be suspended as would prevent notice No.8, general business given for Thursday, 16 September, by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, being called on forthwith.
Amendment to Sessional Orders
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (12.30)-1 move:
That the sessional orders relating to estimates committees be amended by omitting orders (I) and (2) and substituting the following:
"( I) After the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, or a Member deputed by him, on the motion for the second reading of the main Appropriation Bill for a year, the proposed expenditures for the departments and services contained in Schedule 2 to that Bill and the proposed expenditures for the Parliamentary departments contained in Schedule 2 to the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill may be referred to an Estimates committee.

Such referral shall be on motion, moved by a Minister or the Leader or Deputy Leader of the Opposition, of which notice has been given. A committee may be ordered to report by a specified date.
(2) There shall be 6 Estimates committees, to be known as Estimates Committees A, B, C, D, E and F, which shall not vote On, but shall examine and report upon proposed expenditures for the Parliamentary departments, Advance to the Minister for Finance and each department of State; such report may contain a resolution or expression of opinion of the committee but shall not vary the amount of a proposed expenditure."
One of the great problems with democracy these days is for members of parliament to be able to get information, particularly if they are in opposition. One of the most effective ways of getting information from what we call bureaucrats is through Estimates committees. The Government this year, for some reason best known to itself, decided that it will not have any Estimates committees. All we have by way of explanation of this aboutface-this refusal to give us any information-is a letter from the Vice-President of the Executive Council (Sir James Killen) who is at the table. That letter states:
Dear Mr Bowen,
I write to inform you that . . . the Government has decided not to refer Appropriation Bill No. I to Estimates Committees for detailed consideration.
That was a bolt from the blue because we have had the committees for the past three years and they have been valuable indeed. The distinguished Minister said:
On a practical level, the operations of the Committees have indicated that both sides of the House have reservations . . .
I do not know of any reservations except perhaps from Government Ministers. I can understand that and will elaborate on that in the short time available to me. Sir James Killen made the point:
On a number of occasions . . . Committees have not been able to commence hearings . . . because of a lack of a quorum due to a lack of interest . . .
I can tell him that in some cases it was a lack of notice. In one case, for example, I think the Opposition had two day's notice that there were to be committeeOmeetings and people had to come from all over Australia to try to reassemble. Most importantly, he made this point:
. . . the examination of estimates by Committees have tended to degenerate into a question and answer session . . .
What other session could we have except a question and answer session? I have never thought that merely asking a question and getting an answer indicated that degeneration was setting in. In fact it might show some acceleration, from the point of view of government action. Sir James Killen made this point:

1536 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

The committee stage . . . will therefore be conducted in the House.
There is nothing wrong with having debate in the House but if we are denied information the accuracy df our debates on departmental estimates will be limited. Why is it that the Government has had this about-face? I wrote back to the Minister, knowing full well that because he has a rather fixed approach to some of these problems, I was not likely to succeed, and I made this point:
The Opposition has found the Committee meetings very beneficial and it has been in the public interest in that a number of matters have been disclosed which would otherwise not have been brought to notice. It is clear that the opportunity to question and, indeed, cross-e~amine Ministers and officials should not cause any degeneration of standard. It is to be regretted--
I emphasise this--
that the House of Representatives seems to be in a very much inferior position because the Senate has given so much support and time for Committee work. This practice enables the members to be so much better informed and has the undoubted advantage of enabling the public, through the media, to be given information which is never available in the course of parliamentary debate.
I know you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and a number of members on the Government side would agree with me. If we can get information from bureaucrats, as they are called, it would help us. Is all information to be the privilege of the Government? When will the Opposition get access to these officials who make these determinations? Look at the tragedy of the present mess in a number of departments, particularly the Attorney-General's Department and the Department of the Treasury. We cannot get any information from the officials because we cannot get access to them.
Mr Cohen-What about Primary Industry?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-And the Department of Primary industry as well. Let me make this point-bear in mind the Government introduced this innovative measure some three years agothat the former Leader of the House, the present Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) stated:
. . . we decided that we wold adopt the idea of Estimates Committees this year. The concept is to try to give parliamentarians an opportunity to discuss the affairs of those departments . . . to meet the bureaucrats who run those departments---
They certainly do. The Ministers do not have muchsay--
. . . and to discuss in detail the operation of the departments with the Ministers responsible.
This is the Government's own explanation. Why is it so worried about the matter? A former honourable member made this point:
Whilst there will be some honourable members who will be very critical of the way in which some of the Estimates Committees operated, I would like to go on record as saying that I

think it was well worthwhile and a novel introduction . . . Some honourable members have been critical of the Opposition for having used Estimates Committees as an opportunity to grandstand or cross-examtne Ministers . . .
Can honourable members imagine that being a cause of complaint? We never get any answers at Question Time; so we might have a chance to cross-examine in committees. The former Government member did not think that was a problem. He continued:
I reject that notion because I think that this is what Parliament is all about . . .
If we cannot stand up to criticism then it is a rather sad state of affairs in this Parliament.
The present honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron), when talking about the Estimates committee system stated:
The system that we have just practised has a lot to offer . . . I have been completely converted to the view . . .
I hope he votes accordingly in the next fe~ minutes, on the basis of the advantage of Estimates committees. Why is the Government so concerned? Honourable members should look at the statement made by the former Leader of the House, a present Minister. He stated:
It is certainly one of those innovatory concepts that the Government has pursued with the idea of trying to give individual honourable members some greater opportunity to consider the details of the Budget and to examine matters within the Budget in a way that was normally not practical, given both the time constraints and what I guess one would call the size constraints of this chamber.
The purpose of the committees, of course, is not to duplicate the role of the chamber--
I emphasise that--
but to provide individual honourable members with some opportunity to gather information both from Ministers and from their officials . . .
What could be better than that? In my letter to the Minister I made the point that the Estimates committee system is not an alternative; it ought to be supplementary. Therefore we can strengthen the debate in this House by virtue of the Estimates committee system and come into the House with the knowledge we obtained from those committees. That would enable the debates to be so much more beneficial. I can understand the position of the Leader of the House, whilst we applaud many of his characteristics which h~ve nothing to do with his politics. When he was Mmister for Defence he had to take part in Estimates committee hearings. He did away with his officials; he would not let any of them be present. The result was that the members of the committee had a lot of difficulty getting any knowledge.
Sir James KilIen-That is nonsense.

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1537

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I know it is nonsense, but that is what they thought because on no fewer than 14 occasions--
Mr Hyde-A bad example.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-It is not a bad example. I would expect the honourable member to support his Minister, but he should stick to the facts. On no fewer than 14 occasions he was unable to answer questions to supply information. I state for the benefit of the honourable member who interjected that this is a matter of record. I can understand that if a Minister does not have his officials present the Committee will have some difficulties. I am not criticising the Minister's IQ, but he cannot have all the information.
I ask honourable members to look at the disaster that occurred concerning the former Minister for Industrial Relations, the present Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner), who has now been moved from the post because of an apparently embarrassing situation. He was questioned by two experienced committee members. The honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) also was taking a keen interest in the matter, bearing in mind he had been soundly criticised by the Minister, one of his own colleagues. It is understandable that he would want to make some explanation. It was put to me that he made the point that what the Minister then said to the committee was a complete nonsense. At that point he was able to make the explanation for himself-that what the Minister said about his not being able to carryon his portfolio was utterly wrong and that what the Minister was saying about deregistration proceedings, for example, in industrial matters, was complete nonsense. As we know, the Minister was subsequently disposed of to try to strengthen the Government. During another Estimates committee hearing the former Minister for Education, the present Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife), was questioned by our spokesman on education, Mr Dawkins, who revealed that the Government had failed to take account of its own Budgets, particularly in respect of sales tax measures. As a result of the detailed nature of this questioning, he made the point also that the Government envisaged no real projected savings on its colleges of advanced education amalgamations. I am giving details which come from the Hansard record of those committee debates. I am disappointed to think that even the dries on the Government side cannot see some opportunity to get more information.
I will be brief because of the arrangement with the Government to get other business before the House. However, the Opposition emphasises that

it wants both the Estimates committees and the debate in the House. We have always valued the debate in the House because at least the Press people and everybody else can listen to what we are saying. In the Estimates committees we have the advantage of getting, on one occasion in the year, some information from the bureaucrats, some explanations of a mass of figures. How nonsensical it is to have put before us billions of dollars of proposed expenditure about which we cannot get any information. It is crazy! Nobody in his right mind would expect an Opposition to be so denied access to the financial information of the nation. We have plenty of financial information now to show how rubbery the Budget figures are, but in terms of expenditure and how the departments are seeing the sitllation surely the Minister needs no protection from that?
I have had the most unsatisfactory experience with the Attorney-General's Department, trying to find out why the Greek conspiracy case has been allowed to go on at enormous cost when there is no real justification for it. What about the person who paid $75,000 for Mr Sankey's costs from an unknown bank account? I could not get any information about that; I never expect to. It related to criminal maintenance, and one would have thought that an Attorney-General worth his salt would have done something about it. But that did not happen. There are matters where we will not be given information, but we ought to be able to ask the questions. By asking the questions we can at least say to our constituents, particularly those who are of Greek origin, that we are trying to find out why the Government was so vindictive towards them when it had no evidence and why it pursued this matter.
When we talk about democracy in this nation I think it is important that we talk about full, free access to all information. The only way in which we can get it, in the budgetary context, is to ask these departmental officials, who have some knowledge, to give us the information. Unless we can get that information I think our budgetary discussions will be very limited and very onesided. The Government is privy to all the information and refuses to disclose any part of it. It is for those reasons that I have moved the motion.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls the motion seconded?
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (12.44)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the motion. I do so in a spirit of considerable disappointment that the Government has chosen to reverse an initiative which it undertook in this place three years ago. I agree

1538 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

with all the statements made by the various Ministers when they introduced the idea of Estimates committees in August 1980. I can see no good reason, apart from political ones and that it is not in the interests or capacity of honourable members in this House to scrutinise government business, why it should have changed its mind now. I understand that one of the objections of the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), who has never sat easily with the Estimates committees, unlike some of his colleagues, has been that the way in which they have been conducted, particularly with officials from the Public Service, has got at the heart of ministerial responsibility in a way that he considers illegitimate. Certainly, when he appeared before an Estimates committee last year without his officials it seemed to indicate that perhaps that was his view. He can speak for himself later.
I want briefly to take up that point in a little more detail. We have heard repeatedly in this chamber over the last few years, and quite dramatically over the last couple of weeks, constant reference to the incapacity of Ministers these days to accept responsibility for all the activities of their departments. A variety of interpretations have been placed on ministerial responsibility suggesting that the Westminster tradition is changing. Not all of the arguments that have been presented to us have we accepted, but we are obliged to accept them to a certain degree. There is a substantial element of truth in the view that bureaucracies have effectively got out of direct ministerial control over every aspect of them. A Minister cannot expect to be fully briefed on every point of a position being adopted by his servants. That being the case, I would think it is all the more important that, when the Appropriation Bills come before us in this chamber, we have the capacity for detailed scrutiny. The Ministers having abdicated, as they have under successive governments, their position of ministerial responsibility in relation to the bureaucracy-I think too far in a number of areas-is no reason for this House to abdicate its responsibility to seek full and detailed knowledge of appropriations and to secure information about that direct from the people who may have tendered advice to the Minister. If the Minister does not want them to give that advice directly then at least they should be in a position at meetings on detailed consideration to advise the Minister when he looks for answers to questions that are put to him directly. It is very disappointing that the Government has chosen to change its position on this.
I am indebted to the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) for providing me with

some statistics on the extent to which the task of reviewing appropriations in this House has become more complicated over the 80 years of our Federation. In 1901 this House had 75 members. There were 3,774,000 Australians and a Public Service numbering 11,191. Total government outlays were £4,024,000. In 1980, when these Estimates committees were first established-I suspect that this was the major reason for themthe number of members of the House had increased to 125 and our population to 14.5 million, there were 469,000 civil servants under the control of the Federal Parliament and State and municipal employees had increased to a total of 1,592,000. Total government outlays were $39 billion. The task of the review of Appropriation Bills by the House of Representatives clearly has become dramatically more difficult than at the time we federated in 1901. Obviously, if we are to perform our functions properly our procedures will have to be somewhat different from what they were in 1901. These Estimates committees were a very useful addition to our capacity to review those appropriations. It is a very great pity that, at least for this year, they are about to disappear.
It is a great pity also that over the last 20 years the Senate, at least until 1980, had effectively usurped the role of the House of Representatives in reviewing appropriations. Only one substantial point of difference exists between our powers and those of the Senate, and that is our capacity to have a first look at and pass the Appropriation Bills. They may not be introduced in that place. In 1961 the Senate managed to secure, against some criticism from within this chamber, the ability to review Estimates before it actually looked at the Appropriation Bill and before the Bill came before it. Further, it accrued power to itself in 1970 when it formalised this process through the creation of Estimates committees and began a process of scrutiny of Appropriation Bills, a function that ought properly to have resided in this chamber. We acquiesced in this chamber until 1980, in the capacity of the Senate to take over a number of our roles, this being the most significant one which it has taken over. It is extremely disappointing that we have permitted the Senate to do that.
We began to claw back some of that authority in 1980 when these Estimates committees were established. That clawing-back process has ceased and desisted as a result of the Government's decision at this stage not to proceed with Estimates committees. There may have been some problems with quorums. In my experience of Estimates

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1539

committees, when there were problems with quorums, and I hate to inject a note of partisanship in this, it was simply because Government members were not turning up. That is a matter of some disappointment, but it is no good reason why these Estimates committees should be abandoned at this stage. It may be said that these Estimates committees usurp the role of the House in its debate of budgetary matters. I do not accept that point. The way in which Estimates debates have developed in this House over the last few years has been to introduce effectively only a variety of 10-minute second reading speeches. The Estimates committee debates in this House have not proceeded on the basis of a serious investigation of the items before the House. Speeches have become set-piece speeches in the same way as second reading speeches are set-piece speeches. No alteration to those Committee procedures has been suggested to change that. The second point I make on that matter is that even if that were the case and even were honourable members not to accept my argument on that point, there has been ample capacity via the reporting system by which these Estimates committees have reported to the chamber, for the chamber to take up, appropriately, in exactly the same way as it did before, the matters concerned with the Estimates on the basis of the reports of the Estimates committees. So I do not accept that point. That concludes my remarks on the matter and I hope that the House will support this motion.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (12.51)-1 also am disappointed that we are to lose these Estimates committees. It is true that I agree with a great deal that has been said by Opposition members. The committees were not an unqualified~ess. That is a fair observation but possibly the wrollg question to put. The question to ask is whether they were better than the Committee of the Whole procedure in the chamber. I believe that, on balance, they were. We had an opportunity for eyeball to eye-ball discussion and a somewhat better chance to get into the depth of issues. It was 'not merely a matter of quizzing for information, which I can see would be valuable to an Opposition. The committees offered an opportunity to put an argument and have it rebutted. We could then come back to this chamber and have a debate which was akin to a genuine debate rather than a series of set-piece speeches, which is what tends to happen in this place. There is a bit of irony in the present situation in that the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) and I have both been concerned to see that the Parliament operates better. In all charity to the honourable member for

Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) who is sitting opposite, I think he ought to concede that the effort the Leader of the House has put into making this place operate better has borne fruit.
It is not uncommon in the course of human affairs that people who want a common end differ on the means of getting it. It is true that the Leader of the House and I differ on how we ought to get there. Nonetheless it ought to be realised that we are both interested in making the Parliament work better. We have disagreed on the best method of getting there. I believe the committees were an adjunct to the procedures of the House which enabled the House to operate better. For all their failings they were better than what we had and we ought to have pursued them. However, the Leader of the House is a very persuasive gentleman. He managed to persuade my colleagues so that I no longer had the support of the majority of them on the issue. As happens in relation to many other issues, I had to give ground. That is the democratic process and I do not quarrel with it. I am disappointed. I express my disappointment, but I will not make a major issue of the matter at this stage.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (12.54)-1 also wish to express my disappointment about the ending of these Estimates committees. They were established in 1979 as one of those rare examples in this House of a bipartisan attitude, that is, an attitude supported by both sides of the Parliament. Back benchers tried to assert their rights by a more effective method of overseeing the Estimates of the year. The object was to achieve more time for the examination of the Estimates. If one looks at the time spent in Estimates committees and the time spent in committee discussion in the House one can see that in the last three years we have spent something like double the normal amount of time allocated for the consideration of Estimates in Estimates committees. It was believed that the Estimates committees would enable a much more constructive approach to an examination of the Estimates because we would be able to make a critical analysis of those Estimates, asking questions of both the Ministers and the civil servants. Those proposals gained the support of both sides of this House and the Estimates committees were set up. At the time the present Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) in one of his interjections described the whole operation as deplorable. I am afraid that he has maintained that rather old-fashioned attitude to the need to update and make this Parliament function as a late twentieth century institution. Given the opportunity he is now reversing the clock.

1540 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

Let me look at the way those committees worked. First of all, I will mention some of the advantages. There is no doubt that the committees were a much more efficient method of securing information about the Estimates than were the procedures we had before and the procedures we will now have again. What took place in the best of the committees-I am not saying that they all worked perfectly well; I will come to some of the reasons why they did not-was a structured discussion, a question and answer period, between back bench members and usually the full Executive, that is, the Minister and the chief public servants. Indeed, the committees were a big improvement on Question Time. Question Time in this Parliament has become a parody of an effective Question Time. In those Estimates committees there was often very effective questioning. Indeed, even when the answers were not given immediately one received the answer within the week or within 10 days whereas with questions on notice one now has to wait months to get replies. In fact, the committees were very effective in that way. Importantly for both sides of the House, they enabled people to make judgments about both the Ministers and civil servants in a very realistic atmosphere.
Of course, the committees required a degree of self-discipline. I say frankly that it is tougher for back bench members to do a good job in Estimates committees than it is for them to make an Estimates speech for 10 minutes. Back bench
members had to prepare themselves thoroughly for Estimates committees. They had to be ready to deal with the obfuscations of Ministers and civil servants. That required a degree of self-discipline which made us all better members of parliament. We all have to improve our questioning techniques. In this society information is power. The committees were one of the few ways in which we had effective information gathering devices in this
Parliament.
It is said that these committees detracted somehow from the House of Representatives but they were, in fact, an extension of the functions of the House of Representatives. The committees had the same rules. They were subject to privilege. They were open to the public and to the Press. If one examines the Press coverage of Estimates committees in the three years in which these Estimates committees were working one can see that there was much more reporting of the matters that came out of those Estimates committees, because more real information was discovered, than there ever was when the Estimates were simply debated in this House. Indeed, that may be one of the reasons they have been abandoned. It is said

that they detracted from political activity and that somehow they depoliticised the political process. I would have thought that anybody who has observed this House over the past six weeks might think that there were some advantages in the bipartisan operation of committees such as the Estimates committees in order to secure information. As a result of Estimates committees I think we had more time to consider reports. We had more effective discussions.
Of course there were ways in which they could have been improved. I have suggested that there were ways. It was a learning process for us. We need to be more effective in handling and dealing with questions. We could have improved ourselves. Ministers could have certainly improved their performances. Personally I have always advocated that we should have joint Estimates committees with the Senate because the limited resources of this Parliament in terms of manpower would be most effectively utilised in that way.
I am glad that some of the back bench members on the Liberal Party side who originally supported this matter have spoken. The honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) has spoken. I hope that others, such as the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron), will speak in defence of the committees. Certainly people who are now Ministers, such as the honourable member for Sturt (Mr Wilson) and the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton), strongly supported the introduction of Estimates committees. I hope that despite their elevated positions they go on supporting them. The last point I make is that because such committees were effective information gathering devices of course they were a threat to governments. I think that by doing away with them now, by getting rid of them when this Government does not have very long to last, the big sufferers will be members of the Liberal Party in opposition but even more so, this Parliament.
Sitting suspended from 12.59 to 2 p.m.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (2.0)-1 will commence by referring to what I regard as the obvious and acknowledged weaknesses of the Estimates committee system. Often there was a shortage of quorums, which was caused by competing interests and responsibilities facing members, or-there is no escaping the fact-just a plain lack of interest in a particular subject by members of a particular committee. There was also the weakness-I notice that one of the chairmen of committees, the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins), is present-of grand-standing and hogging by one or two individuals which

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1541

frequently led to a loss of interest by other members. The honourable member for Scullin should acknowledge that this matter was more or less under the control of the chairman of the committee concerned. I notice that the honourable member for Wide Bay (Mr Millar) is also present. I am not reflecting on any of the chairmen, but they do not share the obvious talents of Sir Billy Snedden, you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and even the honourable member for Scullin. That only leaves three or four others. I notice that the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) has walked in. He also is a chairman so I must mention him too.
In referring to this subject. I want to pay tribute to the Minister at the table, the Vice-President of the Executive Council and the Leader of the House, Sir James Killen, who is the honourable member for Moreton, for his love of this very tried institution. With his very heart he will work at all times, with any legitimate means, to preserve the system for what he believes is its worth. He correctly believes-this is not for a moment an attack on the Minister-that a Minister is responsible for his Department and is answerable to this House, the Parliament itself, under the chairmanship of the Speaker, comprising the Government, the Opposition, and the parry and thrust of debate. The honourable member believes that fervently. I do not think I will be misrepesenting him for one moment.
The Estimates committees are but an extension of this place. A Minister who believes passionately in that principle could insist that all the questions be directed to him during an Estimates committee hearing-the system that we are about to eliminate-and be answered by him alone. If he believes that a Minister is responsible and a public servant should not make a comment or should not be called upon, he can stand up and say: 'I insist that all questions be directed through me and I will answer them'.
Let us compare the systems, the system that existed in the pre-Estimates comittee days and is about to be returned-I have been here since 1966 so I had some 13 years of the old system-and three years of the system we are about to abandon. Let me make a comparision by using a subject that is familar to me and which I pursued personally, rigorously and vigorously at last year's Estimates committee hearings. I notice that a slight smile is coming across the face of the shadow Minister for Health. He knows that I am going to refer to the views which I hold, views which are now shared by a lot of other people who have since become enlightened about the frightening financial standing of Medibank Private. Under the very old system, the one we are about

to reintroduce, if I get the chance I can stand in this place and speak as I am now. I emphasise the words 'if I get the chance'. The truth of the matter is that there are only so many opportunities to speak during Estimates debates. There are only so many opportunities per department and the Whip has to determine that only three or four can speak at the very most, and sometimes only one or two. If I had been given a chance to stand here for \0 minutes I could have said what I believe is wrong with Medibank. That would have been in the context that all members who have an interest in the debate on the Department of Health could stand up and express their views on a particular aspect. I do not reflect on any particular Minister when I say this because it happened during the Labor administration and it happened during the previous Liberal administration, prior to the introduction of the improved system.
At the end of the debate the Minister, who has three or four public servants advising him, would perhaps sometimes gratuitously and other times meaningfully stand up and say. 'I appreciate the various contributions that have been made by members on this subject. I will bear them in mind and have them looked at.' He then would walk out. Another Minister would come in and take his place, another department would be raised and the three or four servants who were backing the first Minister would be replaced by three or four public servants from another department. That is how the old system went. Yet we are told in this chamber by the lover of the institution, and others who love it, that this was the best system. After the Minister walked out the subject matter was a closed book for another year. It will be so again. What is more, because of the lack of continuity which comes with close questioning, the system to be introduced is not much better than a disjointed page flipping exercise.
Let us look at the system that, to his everlasting credit, was the brainchild of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). This is not something that was born in this Parliament as a result of one or two suggestions. It was the Prime Minister's own interest. He believed that this system would work. I admitted at the outset that the system had frailties and those frailties were all man made. Our own inattention is perhaps sometimes excusable and sometimes explainable by demands on our time. This was a Fraser idea and it was one of the more brilliant things he has brought to this Parliament but we are about to kick it out. We are indulging in the exercise of the baby who weed in the water, so out goes the bath, the water and the baby. The whole lot goes out without looking into how to refine the system.

1542 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

The system that we are about to replace requires a Minister, and what became an entourage of senior people from his department, facing those who also have been elected to administer the affairs of this nation. For most of us it was a source of amazement to see how many civil servants were needed to advise a Minister who was sUbjected to close questioning. That is not a reflection on any Minister or departmental head; rather it is a living example of the complexity of government. The system revealed how many civil servants are necessary to be present to cover the likelihood of any aspect of a department being raised. In my view it showed a weakness in the twentieth century version of the Westminster system as practised in this country. No Minister or his departmental head can have much more than a smatter of knowledge of what goes on within most of the departments in this day and age. It it little wonder, as we race to the last part of the century, that we see so many Ministers struggling to keep up and keep themselves informed on what is going on in their departments. It is little wonder that Ministers would be against the type of committee system introduced over the last two or three years. Why would anyone, or any Minister, want to be part of procedures that can cause a bushfire when he is the one who has to go out and beat out that fire after he may have inadvertently created it?
During consideration of last year's estimates for the Department of Health, and what flowed from that hearing, I extracted more information on the true financial state of Medibank than I would have got had I sat here for 100 years. What is more, I am positive that some of the civil servants who were present that night were unaware of much that I raised and themelves benefited from the process.
It is very easy for anyone in this Parliament to stand up and criticise. I am not here just to criticise. I am making a plea that instead of throwing out the baby with the bath water we look at some of the problems associated with the old system to see whether we can bring changes to that system. Even though I may have contributed to the demise of the Estimates committees, as has every member of the Parliament, I hold the very fervent belief, that the old system gave members of the Parliament more information than any other system I have witnessed in the 16 years I have been in this place.
I believe that the public servants themselves gained tremendously from the system. In the early stages of the committees many of the people in the entourages to which I have referred were absolutely terrified that their special subjects would be

touched upon and that they might be found wanting. That is human nature. For 75 or 80 years public servants had lived in an enclave, untouched and not having to answer to anybody. Now they were being seen by the Minister, their departmental heads and all their peers being subjected to questioning. Even if the advice had to go straight to the Minister before being given to the committee, they were on show for the first time. The nervousness depicted on the faces of some of those public servants indicated how protected they had been.
Finally, I make the observation-this is consistent with my view-that no Minister can hope to have other than a smattering of knowledge of what is going on in his department. Recent events have seen the second Attorney-General in hospital. We recall the death of Senator Ivor Greenwood some years ago. Now his almost successor, Senator Durack, a relatively young man, is also in a hospital bed suffering from a heart attack. The Vice-President of the Executive Council, who is at the table, is responsible for every aspect of his portfolio. If his departmental people do stupid things he has to cop the crow. He is the one who wears it because he is responsible. I believe that the Westminster system has reached the stage where we should re-examine it to ensure that if a departmental head, through his maladministration, causes sloppiness and weakness in his Department he also eats the crow and wears the cap. This should go down the line. The time honoured system of total protection and the belief that we cannot touch a sloppy civil servant should be thrown out the window. The complexity of government is such and so much can go wrong that I believe that the antiquity which surrounds some of the views held in the Parliament is destructive of the well-being of this nation.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (2.13)-1 would like to spend a few minutes on this subject. I am very disappointed that we will be going back to the set pieces of the debate in the Committee of the Whole. The speeches are no more than that. In the second reading debate on the Appropriation Bills members have their speeches prepared. They read them either well or poorly. When it comes to the examination of the Estimates in the Committee of the Whole they do exactly the same thing but they have only 10 minutes in which to do it. Rarely can they get a comprehensive response from the Minister in charge of the department being examined. My honourable friend the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) knows that I have a particular interest in the parliamentary committee system. I chaired the Joint Committee on the Parliamentary Committee System. I

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1543

must admit that Estimates committees for the
House of Representatives did not rate highly in the report of that Committee. I think that was largely because we had some canny senators on the Committee, in Senator Sir Magnus Cormack and Senator Rae, who were very jealous of the way in which the Estimates committees operated in the Senate.
I missed the first time that the Estimates committees of the House sat. I got back from a stint at the United Nations to find that they had been introduced. I must admit that I viewed them with an air of some scepticism. However, my participation in the Estimates committees has been as a chairman. I have not been put in the position of examining the Ministers before them. Myexperience as a chairman in seeing what happened has convinced me that to institute the Estimates committees was a very appropriate step for the House to take. They allowed examination of Ministers on various aspects of their departments. It seems to me that there is some feeling that the committees allowed an open slather on examining public servants in the Ministers' departments. That was not so. Questions were addressed to the Minister, who, at any time, could answer or ask an
official of his department to answer. If at any time a Minister did not want a public servant to answer it was quite within his ambit to say so. The Committees were conducted in a relaxed atmosphere which allowed that to happen. If the Minister wished to refer to the officials of his Department to get information the Committee was always prepared to allow time for the Minister to do so. The procedures were not so rigid that he could not refer to his officers, get the information and answer the question. I think that was one of the virtues of the system. It meant that a direct question could be asked and the Minister could make up his mind whether it should be answered-of course, he faced a sanction if he decided not to answer it and there was some query about what the answer might have been-but if he needed to get information on probing questions he had his officials to inform him and there was no embarrassment at all within the committees about the Minister following that course.
Mention has been made of partisan questioning and some embarrassment being caused to Ministers. It went beyond that. Much of the questioning on the committees was of a bipartisan nature. Back benchers who genuinely wished to have proper information on certain items and functions of a department were able to obtain it. A good deal of information was obtained that was useful to back benchers on both sides of the House. As I .said, I started with an air of scepticism about the

Estimates committees in the House. We had seen them as low priority. Having experienced them in action, I believe it is deplorable that we are to go back to the uninformative old system. I do not believe that the set pieces of the Committee of the Whole debate were intended by the Parliament in the first place. The debate was supposed to be an examination in Committee that would evoke responses from the responsible Ministers. It does not work that way. We are returning to that situation when, over the last couple of years, we have had something that has been informative and useful.
Mr GILES (Wakefield) (2.19)-1 will not hold the House for very long. I want to make two points, in many ways against my better judgment. First of all, I make it very plain that I regard the need for the Government to act in the fashion it is about to act in, that is to abolish the Estimates committees and re-establish the debate in the Committee of the Whole House, as regrettable but entirely understandable. In many ways the Estimates committees have not worked. I do not blame the Government one bit for opposing the motion that has been brought down today by the Opposition. But in saying that, I must state also that I think the decision to abolish Estimates committees is nevertheless an ill-informed and a bad decision. There have been awful problems. I remember that on another occasion I resisted the temptation that I cannot resist today-to point out that one side of the Parliament succeeded in getting nobody-not a single member of Parliament-to an Estimates committee hearing on the Department of Industrial Relations, to the embarrassment at the time of the Minister for Industrial Relations, the present Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and a huge array of civil servants. We cannot have it both ways. If we cannot get a single delegate from Her Majesty's alternative government to an important Estimates committee meeting of that nature, the Opposition is not in much of a position to complain about what the Government is doing today.
Dr Jenkins-Are you saying that that is a general rule or an exception?
Mr GILES-I will continue and say that it is far from the general rule. I was asked a little while ago whether, of all the Estimates committees that I had chaired, it was true that none of them commenced on time. That is quite untrue. Probably the majority of the Estimates committees that I chaired commenced on time. Some of them were very much the opposite and it took a long time before we had a quorum. Those things are pin prick difficulties. I do not blame the Opposition altogether for moving this motion today when this

1544 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982 Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

House has not adopted a responsible attitude to the Estimates committee system.

I turn to the second matter. I guess that I have

chaired mittees

as many, than any

oitfhenrotmemmobree~

Estimates comin the House. I

had a year's start on the honourable member for

Scullin (Dr Jenkins). There is a clear instruction

in the sessional orders that our Estimates com-

mittees should not probe government policy.

They should probe for detail; they should probe

for factual things. But on many occasions

attempts were made to probe on policy issues. It is

very difficult for the chairman of the Estimate

Co~mittee_ Sometimes there is a very slim area in

which to make decisions one way or the other.

Carrying that argument questioning-I take up

ever the

fpuoritnhter~asdome eboyf

the the

hono~rable member for Scullin-but by no means

all o.f It. h~s had a.deliberate political component.

A~am, It IS very difficult for the Chair to apply its

mmd to how best to control this.

Some honourable members have said that Ministers should properly take on the role of answering questions. Certainly, they have their advisers around. them. ~ut the final responsibility for ~nsw.enng questIOns rests with the Minister. This IS qUlt~ !rue. But, of course, that decision is up to the Mmlster. The Leader of the House (Sir James
Kil~en) who is. at the table made that point very plamly some time ago before an Estimates committee when I was in the chair. I think the hearing was on the estimates of the Department of Defence. I can think of other occasions when I issued instructions from the Chair refusing to allow honourable members to ask questions of an official. The question ought fundamentally to have gone to the Minister. If the Minister needs more detail-he often needs more details than he can possibly have in the back of his head-sure, he can delegate the answering to an efficient person.

I make those points in stating that I regret very

much the need for the Opposition to move this

motion. In the ultimate sense, if this House denies

the Estimates committees which I trust it will not, it

dseynstieems itisnrethspeonfsuibtuilrie~

ties forever as a check on the power of the Execu-

tive and the civil servant. Let nobody in this

House forget that. In the ultimate sense if this

House is to be worth its salt adequate attention

must always be given to that proper check and

balance by Parliament over the power of the

Executive and the civil service.

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (2.24)--1 support the motion moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). I pick up the

point that was made earlier by the honourable

member for Swan (Mr Beazley) that we have had

an extraordinary expansion of the functions of

govern~en~ that has not been measured by an

expa~slOn m the number of hours in the day or

days m the week that the Parliament sits. The re-

sult is that .the ~nly way in which we can really

come to gnps with that proliferation of govern-

ment activity is to have some subdivision of

activity-a real division of labour-whereby

people are able to concentrate on particular areas.

We can no longer, as we could in 1901, expect

that the pressed

~fnultlhreanBguedgoeftg, owviellrnbme aednet qauctaitveiltyiecs~vasereexd-

m what m recent years has been the equivalent of

one hour of examination of each government de-

partment in the whole period.

In the last year before the Estimates committees were set up there were 27 government departments and there were, in fact, 27 hours of debate on those departments. That did not mean, of
course, that t.here wa~ one hour for each department. In reahty, the time was subdivided. I point out to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) that such a vital department, for example, as the Department of the Vice-President of the Executive Council would perhaps, in a debate in the full Committee of the Whole be unlikely to receive a proper .amount of attention to explain why its expenditure has gone up 5,000 per cent over last year's expenditure. If we were to examine the Department's estimates in a particular Estimates committee, the explanations for that could, in fact, be brought up. The kinds of matters that are raised in questioning here in Question Time each ~orning tend very often in times of exceptional mterest to be confined to a relatively few govern-
ment dep~rtments. T.here are important departments which are makmg very vital administrative and policy decisions day in, day out which never really get the scrutiny that they deserve.

At least when the Estimates committee system started there was the equivalent of 54 hours of debate in the Estimates committees. It was possible to concentrate on particular areas. A lot of very valuable information came out. It was not always valuable. I was co~cerned about the methodology that was adopted m some of the committees. The
classi~ ~xample, of course, was the Department of Admmlstratlve Services. The Department of Administrative Services produced a briefing book which ran, you may recall Mr Deputy Speaker, to 960 pages. We had an hour to get through it. There were 18 members sitting around the table with a Minister and a panoply of officials at the other end. This meant that because the Department of Administrative Services is not really one

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1545

of the great policy engines of government we simply had an hour to go through the document looking for errors of arithmetic or spelling-of which there were a few-and a few odd inconsistencies. We did not get a great deal out of it so far as policy matters were concerned. As I walked out of the committee room I heard one senior public servant say to another: 'Well, they didn't get much out of that, thank God '. That was absolutely correct; we did not get much out of it.
When we got to hearings on the important policy departments-for example, the Department of Education and the Department of Science and Technology are some of the memorable committee hearings I recall-it was possible to get a great deal of information. It was possible to subject a Minister to sustained questioning in a way, frankly, that is not possible in Question Time. Theoretically, Ministers are available then for sustained questioning but, given the realities of the political situation, we know that we are not likely to have in any given Question Time 10 or 15 questions one after the other directed to the Minister for Education or the Minister for Science and Technology. An American writer on political science, Charles Lindblom, said-it is a phrase which I commend to the Minister-that the prevailing system of government here and in all Western countries is what he called 'disjoined incrementalism'-in other words, there is an enormous amount of empire building particularly as branches grow and expand.
We find that often one element in government does not have a very clear idea of what is going on in any other element. I am sure that in many cases when Ministers called on senior public servants to answer, information was provided that was news to the Minister himself. I think the situation has now got far beyond the capacity of the Parliament sitting in the full plenum to cross-examine, to get the relevant information, to know even the right question to ask. I think we have learnt a good deal from those Estimates committees. I do not think they were perfect. The Government should not be trying to eliminate them; it should, indeed, be trying to reform them.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (2.30)-1 am taking part in this debate today because I believe that it is of particular importance for back benchers to be able to take part in the detailed, probing analysis of government expenditure which takes place during the meetings of the Estimates committees. In full sessions of the House of Representatives individual back benchers get very few opportunities to ask of Government Ministers the searching qcestions which are necessary to ascertain why the Government made certain decisions or took

certain actions in relation to the expending of funds. Another vital aspect of the Estimates committee proceedings is the fact that Ministers are supported in the provision of information by the permanent heads of departments and other senior departmental officers.
The Estimates committee proceedings are a unique opportunity for members of parliament to ascertain the views and the explanations for departmental action on implementation of government policy from departmental officers, who in turn are intimately involved in that policy implementation. In such circumstances it is possible to ask a series of questions which will completely elucidate government action which may have appeared incomprehensible or even be reprehensible when the details are drawn out in the Estimates committee debate. This sort of questioning cannot be done in the normal Question Time which takes place in this House every day.
An example will suffice to explain the point I am making. Estimates Committee F, the Committee dealing with decisions and the administration of the Department of National Development and Energy, held a meeting on 16 September 1981. I attended that meeting, and I will refer to a series of questions which we asked. One of the important criticisms which the Opposition has of Government policy is that the Commonwealth has passed over its responsibility in relation to mineral deVelopment to the States to the detriment of national priorities and the control of the national economy. At this meeting of Estimates Committee F we were able, by putting a series of questions to senior officers of the Department and to the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), to establish to our satisfaction that the Commonwealth has been quite irresponsible in permitting the States to determine economic priorities in relation to resource development. We were able to indicate that mineral development was undertaken in a way which put Australia at a grave disadvantage in relation to its bargaining position with powerful overseas corporations. We were also able to show that mineral development was undertaken by State governments without regard to the necessary infrastructure development of, for example, housing, welfare and community facilities.
In the form of debate which takes place in the House of Representatives it is not possible to conduct such a line of inquiry to elicit the important information which I have indicated is able to be done in the Estimates Committees. It is important for Government Ministers and their departmental

1546 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

officers to be subjected to rigorous inquiry. The information elicited is vital information for the public and for all members of this House. It would appear that the Government is attempting-and will succeed, no doubt, with its numbers-to get rid of Estimates committees because they are proving a nuisance to the Government. Ministers and departmental officers who do not want to have to answer searching questions on their activities obviously have something to hide. The debate we have had in the Parliament over the past few weeks in relation to ministerial responsibility should make it quite clear how important it is that the procedures of Estimate committee meetings are retained by the House of Representatives. It is vital for democratic government. If the Government uses its numbers to discontinue the Estimates committee system it is because it is afraid of detailed public scrutiny of its administration. That must draw attention to the fact that it has something to hide.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House) (2.34)-This debate has been welcomed indeed by me for a variety of reasons. I should at once thank all honourable members who have participated in the debate for the moderation of language they have used and for their obvious concern about the decision taken by the Government. The second singular purpose the debate has served has been to focus the attention of the House on what is the real role of Parliament. My friend the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), not in any harsh pejorative sense, referred to some old-fashioned views that he claimed I held. I do not resile from that. I am not hurt by the impeachment, even if my friend meant it as such. I happen to hold very old-fashioned views about Parliament. In the first place, I believe that Parliament is a speaking place. The word 'parliament' is drawn from the French 'parler', to speak. This is a speaking place. That is the first observation I make.
My second observation is that I believe in the authority of this place. That is why I would resist to the end any suggestion of co-mingling the authority of this place with that of another place. The third observation I make about Parliament is that I believe utterly in responsible government. I have heard a lot said in recent times about responsible government and about ministerial responsibility. This is my twenty-seventh year in this place and I assure my friends, both opposite and those who sit behind me, I have not the slightest intention of staying here for another 27 years. However, I am deeply convinced that Ministers are responsible to this place. I have said that before and I believe it

deserves to be said again. No matter how uncomfortable, no matter how embarrassing, no matter how distressing or hurtful the process of inquiry may be, a Minister must answer. This is, indeed, the area of disagreement between us. I do not believe that the area of disagreement is as substantial as some honourable members may suggest and believe.
Before I turn to the Estimates committee system as such, I say to the House that what I have in prospect is to return the authority of this House to genuine interrogation at an Estimates committee in this place. I will tell honourable members how to do it. I should not, I suppose, in the twilight of a political career-some may say no matter how blemished it may be-give away too many hints. I am bound to say to the House that the standard of questioning in this place is a disgrace to interrogation, and I will tell the House why.
Dr Jenkins-So are the answers.
Sir JAMES KILLEN-I quite agree. The dangerous question, whether it is posed in Parliament or at a criminal trial, is the short question. In the years I have been a Minister in thi& place if a fellow gets up and asks me seven or eight qustions all rolled into one, to put it in homely language, you can play him off a break. A question asked in a matter of a few words is the one because the Minister has not got tim.e to gather together what cerebal processes he may command. That is very true. The same situation applies in the courts. If one cross-examines some person, whether it be for the Crown or against it, it is the short question which is the one that is feared. I can turn to the Estimates committees, where some questions run into nearly 250 or 300 words. That is absurd.
I would like to see the two hours which is allocated to, say, the Department of Defence-myoid department-given over to questioning of the Minister. That is where I part with my friends opposite. I hold the view and I hold it, as I said, very deeply, that the Minister must answer. I resent the idea that civil servants answer. I respect those honourable members who disagree with me, but that is not our system of government. It is not responsible government. That is the profound difference between our system of government and the American congressional system of government. If the Minister does not know the answer then the questioner can lacerate him, embarrass him, do what he likes with him. The Minister can be held up to scorn and to ridicule, to laughter and to derision. Honourable members can do all of those things. They can impugn his standing and his reputation in the Parliament. For example, two hours could

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1547

be given over to Defence estimates, when honourable gentlemen on both sides could ask the Minister of the day questions. I am handing out a bit of advice on short questions, which I trust will not be resented. Honourable members could ask: 'What is the Minister doing about this? Item so and so says this? What does it mean?'
I have seen all the Estimates debates in this place for many years, and my honourable friends opposite are quite right-they are essentially miniature second reading debate speeches. The honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) may ask a Minister 'What is happening at Wallangarra about item so and so', followed by the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) asking: 'What is happening here? What does this mean?' In other words, two hours may be given up to questioning. What is the value of that? I will tell the House what the value of it is. In the last Estimates debate some 24 estimates were considered, and if an honourable member had gone to one meeting every time the committees sat, he would have gone to only eight.
I come to my friend the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). I do not disguise the affection and admiration I have for him. He has one dominating blemish in his makeup, and that is his politics; and I am trying hard to correct that. I wrote to him, I thought not in terms of exaggerated courtesy, and I said, amongst other things:
The examination of estimates by committees has tended to degenerate into a question and answer session--
My honourable friend stopped there-a classic case of suppressio veri-and did not go on to say the rest:
between members and officials and the appropriate responsibilities of Ministers tended to be distorted by the process.
As I say, that is the difference between us.
Dr Jenkins-Who was the witness?
Sir JAMES KILLEN-If honourable members disagree with me, as I say, I will respect that. But I believe that the Minister must answer and must be responsible. In reply to that letter my friend said, amongst other things:
The committee concept should not be considered as an alternative to debate in the House. Rather it should be supplementary to it.
We can test that readily. If an honourable member wants to participate in the consideration of, say, 12 or 14 estimates-there are those of us in this House who have seen those with the versatility of mind, intellect and interest to sweep through the whole apparatus of governmentunder the existing system the maximum he can attend is eight. My honourable friend the Deputy

Leader of the Opposition says: 'We want the opportunity to question'. I have made one observation about the standard of interrogation. I want to make another one. When the Estimates committees first started I adverted to my fundamental conviction regarding the authority of parliament and I also referred to the fact that the legislative section of the Parliamentary Library prepared questions for members. I resented that. May I say why I resent it? A member should prepare his own speeches and his own questions, otherwise we expose this Parliament to infinite peril. I gave a few illustrations of that. At that time the contract was being negotiated regarding the new tactical fighter. I said I could undertake with 20 or 30 polished and damaging interrogatories to ensure that a particular type of aeroplane was swept out of consideration. One does not know from whom or for what motive the questions were prepared. I believe that is very important to this place. My honourable friend said that it is only through the committee process that we can do this. We have sought to refer some 11 Bills to legislation committees. Such a reference cannot be made unless there is co-operation from the entire House, and the reference has not been accepted. These were unspectacular Bills; for example, Customs and excise amendment Bills and a wildlife protection Bill. They called for hard and detailed work.
Mr Lionel Bowen-We were not opposing the legislation.
Sir JAMES KILLEN-I am talking about the consideration of the minutia of the Bills in which I think there is some value. My honourable friend said: 'You turned up at the last lot of Estimates committees without any advisers'. That is perfectly true. The honourable gentleman wrings no apology from me for that. I have stated my position. Then he went on to twist my tail with that generosity of manner that I enjoy. He said: 'There were some 14 questions that the Minister could not answer'. I will do a deal with the honourable gentleman. There is a book of lottery tickets for him if he can identify the 14 questions I could not answer. One I did confess I had difficulty in answering was along these lines:
Does the Minister know of any Australian industrial capacity for the manufacture or maintenance of torsion bar suspensions?
I am bound to say to the House that I have yet to find the manufacturing techniques of torsion bar suspensions to be the subject of controversy and debate at Woolloongabba in Brisbane. Generosity sweeps over me. I am enjoined every waking hour of my life, by Christ, to be charitable, and charity consumes me at the moment. Imagine two hours facing questions such as that! As I say, I did not

1548 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Estimates Committees: Sessional Orders

have any advisers with me because I believed it was my responsibility. If I am to be buffeted by a committee, so be it.

I want the House to come back to my proposal. Under the existing arrangements, under the sessional order, the most Estimates committee meetings that an energetic member could go along
to would be eight. If one has the vigour of intellect and sweep of imagination of my friends opposite, who want to participate, to inquire and to ask
searching questions of Ministers to find out whether Ministers are in control of their depart-
ments, I would say that Estimates committees, as
they are presently run, certainly would not give one the opportunity for that. All that would be
needed would be for some nimble-minded Minis-
ter, or some Minister who simply did not care
what took place, to say: 'I call on Admiral Soand-so or Mr So-and-so to answer that'. If we let members question a Minister in this place, that is
their opportunity to put him through whatever process of discomfort they like.

The last thing I want to say is this. I would wel-
come the opportunity of discussing with my friend the Deputy Leader of the Opposition the proposal
I have put to the House to devote two hours, or
whatever time it may be, to the consideration of
Estimates in this place and to turn it into a question and answer session rather than trot out all
sorts of miniature second reading speeches. I give another indicator of my concern as to the role of private members in this place and the authority of
this place: I am considering what implications, what involvements, there would be in handing over the morning of one Friday in every three or
four weeks to private members to put their points
of view. I am not staying here for another 27 years, but this place has been my home for a very
long time. I hope it will not be regarded as Irish
sentimentality that I have profound respect, admiration and love for it.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Lionel Bowen's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

43

Noes

59

Majority

16

Armitage. J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.

AYES

Jacobi. R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones. Barry
Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C.

AYES
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J, S. Duffy,M.J. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford,e.J.

McLeay. Leo Maher, M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles,G.O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D. F. Katler, R.e. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher,S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, e. W. Viner, R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Fry, K. L. Everingham, D. N. Innes, U. E. Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les

Bradfield, J. M. Dobie,J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Lynch, Sir Phillip McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Robinson, Ian

Question so resolved in the negative.

QUEENSLAND ABORIGINALS AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS
(SELF-MANAGEMENT AND LAND RIGHTS) BILL 1982
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I seek leave to move a motion to enable Order of the Day No, 7, General Business, for the resumption of the debate on the second reading of the Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (SelfManagement and Land Rights) Bill 1982 to be called on forthwith and have precedence until disposed of.
Leave not granted.

Aboriginals & Islanders Land Rights Bill 16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1549

Suspension of Standing and Sessional Orders
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (2.56)-In that case, I move:
That so much of the Standing and Sessional Orders be suspended as would prevent Order of the Day No.7, General Business, for the resumption of the debate on the second reading of the Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982 being called on forthwith and having precedence until disposed of.
The motion is seconded by the honourable member for Brisbane (Mr Cross). The Bill that this motion seeks to bring on and have debated was passed by the Senate in March. I introduced the Bill on 24 March and moved the motion for the second reading. My colleague the honourable member for Brisbane seconded the motion at that time. Since then the Bill has languished at the bottom of the Notice Paper. There are now some 300 matters ahead of this Bill in the order of business before the House. I recognise that the Government is embarrassed by the proposition but no matter how it tries to bury the matter it will not go away until the House debates it and votes on it. The motion that I have now moved seeks to resuscitate the Bill, to bring it before the House and to have it voted upon.
I have moved the motion at this time because the matter becomes more urgent by the day. In Queensland the aspirations of the Aboriginal people remain unfulfilled. The Aboriginal people are becoming increasingly restive about the high handed and stubborn refusal of the Queensland Government to act to provide for the needs of Aboriginal people. The Bill seeks to invoke the full constitutional authority of the Commonwealth in this area to provide for Aboriginal communities to have secure tenure to the land which for years has comprised Aboriginal reserves. It seeks to do no more than provide a mechanism for those communities to control the land which, at least in theory, has been theirs and remains theirs. The land area involved is just 2 per cent of the land area of Queensland.
Since the introduction of the Bill into this House there have been a number of important developments. The day after I spoke in this House the Queensland Government introduced a Bill to amend the Land Act. The Bill was passed without amendment in the Queensland Parliament on 30 March-a sort of early April Fools Day joke. To get a fair assessment of what that Bill provided I refer to the April Fools Day statement issued by the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Peter Baume. In that statement the Minister described the Bill before the Queensland Parliament as a significant advance. He said that the Bill provided for the following improvements--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! Before the honourable member proceeds I remind him that he is presently addressing the question that the sessional orders be suspended. He can advance reasons as to why but not in detail that would explore the subject that he wishes to bring before the House if the sessional orders are suspended.
Mr DAWKINS-Thank you for your guidance, Mr Deputy Speaker. The point is that the matter is on the Notice Paper. Some important developments have happened since that time which require it to be brought on now. What the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs had to say about the proposal is central to the reason why the matter ought to be brought before this House today. I will however confine my remarks as tightly as possible. The point is that if the Queensland Government had acted in a way which made the current Bill unnecessary of course there would be no reason to bring it on now. I will establish that in fact the Bill passed by the Queensland Parliament does not satisfy the requirements of the Bill passed by the Senate and now before this House. The Minister said at the time that it provided for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders to have title to their reserves, that it provided for perpetual title which would be held directly by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island communities and that it would secure by parliamentary review any action to revoke the title. He said also that the Queensland Government had promised the communities increased responsibility for their own affairs. The Minister went on to say:
The Commonwealth, however, has some particular concerns. Because of these concerns, the Commonwealth Government now gives an unequivocal guarantee:
that it will stand behind the stated intent of the Queensland Government to provide 'security of tenure and integrity of the reserve land';
that if, there were actions which transgressed these principles, or which indicated an unreasonable use of the discretions in the legislation, the Commonwealth would act accordingly.
His statement at that time was an attempt to soothe Aboriginals and others into thinking that the claims of Aboriginals had been met or were on the way to being made by the Queensland Government. If that had been true it may have constituted grounds for our not persisting with our own Bill. But the Queensland amendments were referred to an eminent Queensland Queen's Counsel, C. W. Pincus, whose conclusion was:
If there was a genuine intention of giving security of tenure, it is manifest that that intention has by no means been achieved in the Bill placed before me.

1550 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982 Aboriginals & Islanders Land Rights Bill

That is the Bill that went through the Queensland Parliament in April of this year. There are numerous other defects in the Queensland Bill which I will not go into at the moment, but on the basis that the former Commonwealth Minister had provided the guarantee which I referred to it is clear that grounds now exist for the Commonwealth to iake action. As I said, the former Minister said that if there were no security of tenure then of course the Commonwealth would act in response to its unequivocal guarantee. Mr Pincus said that there is no security in the current Act as passed by the Queensland Government. We waited for Commonwealth action; none eventuated. A new Minister-the honourable member for Sturt (Mr Wilson)-was appointed. We waited again-and again we waited in vain. Indeed, what the new Minister revealed was a pathetic misunderstanding of the whole situation. He was interviewed on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program A.M. on 2 July. He was asked what he thought of the Queensland Government's moves and whether there was any need for Federal Government intervention. He said:
What we will be doing is watching the progress that is being made.
Then importantly he said:
There have been changes in Queensland legislation that give security of tenure. There have been changes that give integrity to the boundaries.
What the Minister said on that occasion is just plain wrong, as has been revealed quite clearly by the learned opinion of Mr Pincus. The Queensland Bill does not provide for security of tenure. On the basis of his predecessor's unequivocal guarantee the Commonwealth must act.
There are other reasons for bringing this matter on now. In less than two weeks the Commonwealth Games will open in Brisbane. In exactly ten days time Aboriginal people from all over Queensland, and indeed all over Australia, will gather in support of the claims for land rights. Aboriginals and those who support them will not disrupt the Games; they have no wish to do so. They would like nothing better than to be able to share in the celebration of international co-operation which the Games provide. But they cannot do so when the sorts of objectives which the Commonwealth itself upholds and works to advance are denied to the Aboriginal people of Queensland. It would be hypocritical to pretend that the injustice, the discrimination and the absence of basic rights-the day to day reality for Aboriginals in Queensland-do not exist simply to put on the best appearance for our international visitors. It will be the object of the rally and the march on 26

October and of the activities which take place during the Games--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)- Order! I think the honourable member has lapsed into his former practice of making remarks which are irrelevant to the immediate question.
Mr DAWKINS-It is important that we take action now, before 26 October, before it is necessary for people to assemble in Queensland to demand land rights. We must all be convinced by now that the Queensland Government will not act. We in this Parliament therefore must act. We cannot sit by idly and impervious to the pleas for action from people in Queensland. The objective of land rights is apparently an objective which we on this side of the House share with the Government. Indeed this Bill passed the Senate without one vote being recorded against it.
If we bring on and pass this Bill the dark cloud of protest which is gathering over Brisbane will be dispersed. The protesters can join the celebration. If this House defeats this motion, let every honourable member who votes against it be aware that whatever happens in the streets of Brisbane-if one irresponsible politician or policeman provokes a confrontation, or if one drop of blood is spilled-his actions today will follow him to his grave. We have a chance to act today not just for the Aboriginals of Queensland; we can take a step towards removing part of our national shame. We can commence the creation of real nationhood based on satisfying the legitimate claims of the original owners of this country. If we turn away our negligence will be condemned.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr CROSS (Brisbane) (3.7)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the motion. I have been associated for some 25 years with organisations in Brisbane, and in other parts of Queensland, endeavouring to improve the lot of Aboriginals, so I can speak with some knowledge of the views of Aboriginal people in Brisbane. I am the former Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs. I wish to compare the attitudes of the Brisbane Aboriginals with those of Aboriginals throughout Australia. The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Mr Wilson) and his predecessor have made Press statements. I raised this matter on the adjournment debate a couple of weeks ago. The Minister came to Queensland the following day and made a statement which seemed to guarantee the Aboriginals that the Commonwealth was standing behind the Queensland Government to ensure that it carried

Aboriginals & Islanders Land Rights Bill 16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1551

out its stated intentions. But something more than that is necessary if we are to keep faith with the Aboriginal people of Queensland and if we are to minimise the potential for trouble at the forthcoming Commonwealth Games. That is the reason for the urgency on this matter in the House today.
The Aboriginal people in Brisbane consider that they should seize the opportunity presented by the Commonwealth Games, an international event in their home City, to indicate to people outside the Australian audience that all is not well in terms of the land rights of the indigenous people of that State. They hope to do so in a peaceful and lawful manner. The Queensland police force has issued a permit for a march to follow a rally on Sunday ~6 September. Coming from elsewhere are people-not all of them Aboriginals-who are keen to bring about some provocation or confrontation at the Commonwealth Games. It is our belief on the Opposition side of the House that this Bill should be debated in order that the Minister may have the opportunity of saying in this House the things he has said in Press statements elsewhere and give a clear commitment to the Aboriginal people of Queensland-I of course include those people from the Torres Strait Islands, who do not regard themselves as Australian Aboriginals but who are in fact Aborigines in terms of the Constitutionand an earnest indication of the sincerity on both sides of the House. It is for that reason that we believe that the Queensland Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management) and Land Rights) Bill should be brought back forthwith.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs) (3.9)-The proponents of this motion have brought it forward on the suggestion that there is a matter of great urgency. I think it is necessary to draw to the attention of the House the fact that Senator Ryan's Queensland Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-management and Land Rights) Bill was introduced into another chamber in August 1981. She then said it had to be debated urgently and dealt with urgently because there was a threat to the lands occupied by Queensland Aboriginals. Throughout that period no piece of land has been taken away from any Aboriginal reserve popUlation. The integrity of the boundaries of their reserves has not in any way been prejudiced. The Queensland Government has a commitment to grant those reserve lands under deeds of grant in trust. It is true that, from a narrow legal point of view, byexecutive action under certain circumstances, those deeds of grant in trust could be called into question.

However, honourable members opposite need to recognise, firstly, that there is a Queensland Government undertaking that that executive authority will not be exercised unless it has the approval of the Queensland Parliament and, secondly, that because there are many who question the integrity of the Queensland Government the Commonwealth Government has given a clear and unequivocal guarantee that, should the Queensland Government in any way back away from the spirit of its commitment, this Government will act. There have been no circumstances or grounds upon which it has been necessary for us to consider acting. But in the event of there being such grounds, we would act. That commitment was given by my predecessor. It has been given by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and was confirmed recently when I was on a visit to Queensland.
Since the debate on this Bill was first initiated, a great deal of progress has been made towards the land rights of the Queensland Aboriginal people. In fact, within Queensland itself, because of the continuing debate, there is a rising understanding of the aspirations and desires of the Aboriginal people to have freehold title. I was interested in the statements made by Mr Hinze and by the Minister for Water Resources and Aboriginal and Island Affairs about the possibility of freehold title. It is ceasing to be a question of argument as to the nature of title but rather is a question as to the timing of the grant of those titles. In those circumstances I think it is important to ensure that the gains that have already been won are maintained.
When suggestions of threats are made that, if action is not taken difficulties might arise, I think all honourable members in this House and all Australians need to recognise that, throughout the Australian community, there is a great deal of goodwill towards Aboriginal affairs policies and a great deal of determination on the part of fair thinking Australians to give our Aboriginal people the opportunity to overcome the disadvantages caused by the circumstances of history. I think we need to recognise that the progress that has been made could be set back by unfortunate circumstances. I believe that there are Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal people throughout Australia today who do not want to see the cause of the Aboriginal people or the circumstances of the achievement of their desires and aspirations set back by the misuse of what should be for all Australians, Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal, a great national and international event.
It is interesting to note that the Aboriginal people are increasingly saying publicly and to

1552 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982 Aboriginals & Islanders Land Rights Bill

many of us privately that all they want to do is place before Australians and other people their hopes and aspirations in such a way that it does not cause the friendly games to be given a title other than that. Therefore, we need to recognise that the Commonwealth Government has given a firm and clear commitment that the progress made with regard to security of tenure of the Aboriginal people of Queensland, the integrity of the boundaries of those lands and the importance of proper and full consultation in the development of services legislation so that the Aboriginal people can manage their affairs in their communities according to the rules, is developed with their participation. With those commitments--

Mr Cross-How long?

Mr WILSON-The honourable member asked how long. That is an interesting question. There are those who get anxious that insufficient time will be given and there are others who ask: 'How long?'. What is important in the process of consultation about self-management services legislation is that the people for whom that legislation is being developed and who should be part of its development have adequate time for full consultation both through official and non-official
means so that they can have an input and feel that they have participated in the framing of that legislation. In that way, when the legislation is passed
in the Queensland Parliament it will be a response to the aspirations of the Aboriginal people and the manner in which they might want to run their affairs. With all those commitments we have to be . sure that we do not cause circumstances that, over the weeks immediately ahead, set back the cause of the Aboriginal people.

In those circumstances we do not need to bring in legislation that is not needed. No land has been taken away. Advances have been made and are continuing to be made. Those who seek to use this opportunity to put at risk the friendly games and at the same time the advancement of the Aboriginal people are doing Australia and, more importantly, the Aboriginal people of Australia a great disservice.

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

43

Majority

18

Adermann, A. E.

AYES

Hunt. R. l. D.

AYES
Anthony.]. D.
Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewe" Cameron, Ian Carlton, l. l. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Fife,W.C Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H.
Good luck, B. l. Groom,R.l. Hall, Steele Harris,G. McD Hicks, N. l. Hodges,l.C Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Macphee, L M. Moore,J.C Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, 1. R. Rocher,A.C Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. l. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, L B. C

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C Blewett, N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,l. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, l. S. Duffy, M.J. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C Howe, B.L. Humphreys, B. C (Teller) Hurford,Cl.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C McLeay, Leo Maher, M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,LG. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Bradfield, J. M. Dobie,J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Lynch, Sir Phillip McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Robinson, Ian

Fry,K.L Everingham, D. N. Innes, V. E. Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Dawkins's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

43

Noes

61

Majority

18

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill 16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1553

AYES
Armitage. J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J.

Jacobi. R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. McLeay, Leo Maher, M. L. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Ureo, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

NOES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M. E. Birney, R. J. BouTchier,J. W. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges.J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman. A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R.e. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair," McC. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Fry, K. L. Everingham, D. N. Innes, V. E. Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Klugman, R. E. McMahon. Les

PAIRS

Bradfield, J. M. Dobie,J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Lynch, Sir Phillip McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Robinson, Ian

Question so resolved in the negative,

INCOME TAX (INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time,

Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.30)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will provide legislative authority for the entry into force of comprehensive double taxation agreements with the Republic of Korea and the Kingdom of Norway. The agreements, which were signed on 12 July 1982 and 6 May 1982 respectively, deal with all forms of income flowing between Australia and each of the other two countries, Neither can enter into force until all necessary constitutional processes are completed both by Australia and the other country,
Double taxation agreements have two primary objects-the elimination of international double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion, The first of these objects is achieved by the contracting countries agreeing to the allocation of taxing rights between them. There are various ways by which this is done, depending upon the nature of the income involved, For example, some types of income will be taxed only in the country of residence while other income may be taxed only in the country in which it has its source, A third category is comprised of income which may be taxed in both countries, with the country of source generally agreeing to limit its tax, and the country of residence of the taxpayer agreeing to allow a credit against its tax on such income for the tax paid in the other country,
Both of the new treaties accord in all essential respects with the position that Australian Governments have taken over the years in relation to double taxation agreements. Each provides for the country of source to limit its tax on dividends, interest and royalties, Under the Korean agreement, the country of source is to limit its tax to 15 per cent of the gross amount of any dividend, interest or royalty income flowing to the other country, For its part, Australia will reduce the rate of withholding tax on dividends flowing to Korea from the normal 30 per cent rate to the 15 per cent rate specified in the agreement but, as the rate of withholding tax on interest under Australia's domestic law is 10 per cent, this will not be affected by these arrangments,
In Australia royalties paid to non-residents are taxed on the ordinary assessment basis and, accordingly, the limit specified by the agreement will not affect the amount of Australian tax on royalties unless the tax which would otherwise be assessed is greater than 15 per cent of the gross amount of the royalties paid to Korean residents. For its part, Korea will reduce its rate of tax on dividends, interest and royalties from the existing

1554 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982 Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

25 per cent to the 15 per cent rate specified in the agreement. In some cases, however, Korea may, in accordance with its industry incentive legislation, wholly or partially exempt from Korean tax certain interest and royalty payments made to Australian residents. If nothing were done to avoid the situation, the tax so forgone by Korea would simply result in a corresponding reduction in the credit to be allowed by Australia against its tax on the relevant interest and royalty payments. In other words, the Australian revenue would pick up the tax forgone by Korea, thus nullifying the incentive. To avoid that result, provision is made in the agreement for Australia, as a 'tax sparing' measure, to allow a credit against its tax for tax foregone by Korea under agreed Korean incentive legislation as if notional tax equal to 10 per cent of the interest or royalty income had been paid to the Republic of Korea. These tax sparing arrangements are broadly similar to those which have been included in agreements with other developing countries in the region.
Under the Norwegian agreement the tax of the country of source is to be limited to 15 per cent in the case of dividends and to 10 per cent for both interest and royalties. Again, this limit will not affect Australia's rate of withholding tax on interest nor, since Norway does not at present tax interest or royalties paid to non-residents, will it affect the position regarding interest or royalties flowing from Norway to Australia. However, if Norway were to impose a tax on interest or royalties in the future, the limit of 10 per cent would apply. As with the Korean Agreement, the limit on the tax on royalties will only affect Australian Tax on royalties paid to Norway where tax on the ordinary assessment basis would otherwise have exceeded the limit expressed in the agreement. Both agreements contain measures for the formal relief of double taxation of income that may be taxed in both countries, with the country of residence of the taxpayer affording the necessary relief by the allowance of a credit against its tax for tax paid to the country of source.
So far as Australian residents are concerned, income in respect of which a limit is imposed by the agreements on the tax of the country of sourcedividends, interest and royalties-will generally be taxed here with credit being allowed for the tax of the country of source. However, foreign source dividends received by Australian companies will continue to be effectively tax free in Australia under existing legislation. Other income that is taxed in full in the country of source will continue to be exempt from Australian tax. So far as the object of preventing fiscal evasion is concerned, provisions are made in each agreement for the

exchange of information and for consultation between the tax administrations of the contracting countries. A memorandum containing more detailed explanations of technical aspects of the Bill and of the agreements will be made available to honourable members. I commend the Bill to the house.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
STATES (WORKS AND HOUSING) ASSISTANCE BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.37)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The main purposes of this Bill are to authorise the payment in 1982-83 of general purpose capital grants to the States totalling $457,667,000; and amounts the States and the Northern Territory may choose to nominate from their 1982-83 Loan Council borrowing programs to be provided for welfare housing at concessional loan terms and conditions.
At the June 1982 Loan Council meeting, an overall program of assistance for the States for works and housing in 1982-83 was agreed, comprising the States' Government Loan Council Program of $1,438m and $247.2m for welfare housing under the established welfare housing assistance arrangements. Part of the States' Loan Council Program, some $65m, was earmarked for welfare housing and is being provided for as a grant, along with other welfare housing grants, under Appropriation Bill (No.2). The arrangement for the States to nominate further funds as they wish for welfare housing from their Loan Council programs was also agreed at the June Loan Council meeting. That is, Commonwealth funds available to the States for welfare housing in 1982-83 aggregate to $312.2m plus whatever extra amounts the States choose to nominate from their Loan Council programs.
The general purpose capital grant amounts to one-third of the States' Loan Council Program net of the $65m grant earmarked for welfare housing. The Bill also provides for the payment of general purpose capital grants in the first six months of 1983-84 up to an amount equal to one-half of the 1982-83 amount, pending passage of legislation to authorise grants in 1983-84. These proposed grants represent a continuation of arrangements initiated by the Liberal-Country Party Government in 1970, which provide that a proportion of the States' Government Loan Council Program

States (Works and Housing) Assistance Bill 16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1555

should take the form of interest-free non-repayable grants instead of what would otherwise be interest-bearing borrowings by the States.
The effect of the grants is to relieve the States of debt charges-that is, interest payments and sinking fund contributions-which they would otherwise have to pay, and the grants accordingly have a substantial beneficial effect on the States' financial positions. The grants were introduced to help States finance works such as schools, and other capital works from which debt charges are not normally recovered. The States are, however, entirely free to apply these grants as they choose.
The Bill provides that, upon receipt of requests by the States and the Northern Territory, the concessional loans for welfare housing will be made available in the amounts nominated. The funds will be paid at the loan terms and conditions of the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement and hence will bear interest at the rate of 4t per cent per annum and will be repayable over 53 years.
As a condition to the payment of these funds, the Bill contains a provision that the States and the Northern Territory will continue to provide at least as much from their own resources for welfare housing in 1982-83 as they did in 1981-82.
The overall effect of the new welfare housing assistance arrangements is that the Commonwealth is providing more than 25 per cent specifically for this purpose in 1982-83 over and above what it provided in 1981-82, all by way of concessionalloans or grants, and that the States and the Northern Territory also have the opportunity to convert part of their Loan Council programs to this form of assistance according to their wishes and priorities.
The rest of the States' Government Loan Council programs-that is, the program other than the $65m already earmarked for welfare housing-amounts to $1,373m, which represents a 5 per cent increase on the total program for 1981-82. As mentioned earlier, the one-third general purpose grant element of this amount is appropriated by the Bill.
The States' Government Loan Council Program is, of course, only one component of overall funds available to the States from the Commonwealth Budget. In 1982-83 these overall funds are estimated to total $15,268m, an increase of 13.7 per cent on 1981-82, and represent about one-third of estimated Commonwealth Budget outiays this year. Payments to or for the States in addition to the general purpose capital funds approved by the Loan Council are expected to increase by 14.7 per cent to $13,895m in 1982-83.

All but $5, 154m of this involves general purpose funds which may, of course, be spent by the States however they see fit, including on capital works projects.
At its June 1982 meeting, the Loan Council also approved an increase in the larger State semi-government authorities' borrowing programs of 13.6 per cent to $1,047m for 1982-83. These figures exclude borrowings by major electricity authorities which have, at least for the next three years, been put outside the Loan Council ambit and can be determined by the States themselves.
The Government considers these arrangements with the States to be generous. They also provide flexibility to the States in setting their own expenditure priorities.
This Bill is an important measure in these overall arrangements and I commend it to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE (PRIMARY PRODUCERS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.44)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the special Commonwealth drought assistance measures announced on 31 August 1982. They are a subsidy on interest payments over 12 per cent made by eligible drought declared farmers and a subsidy on fodder purchased to be fed to drought affected sheep and cattle.
The fundamental aim of these measures is to help prevent drought affected farmers from walking off their properties because of difficulties in servicing their debts, and reduce the cost of drought feeding and so enable graziers to retain stock, particularly breeding stock. This will also contribute to a more rapid economic recovery in the rural sector when the drought breaks.
It would be disastrous for the nation if the drought were allowed to cause a major exodus of farmers from the land, or a serious depletion of sheep and cattle breeding stock.
Currently, an estimated 100,000 farms across Australia are drought affected. Already the net value of rural production is forecast by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics to be some $1,300m below last year's level. If the drought does not break very shortly, the Bureau believes

1556 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982 Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Bill

the net value of rural production could fall to half of last year's level.
The effect on the cash surpluses of farmers will be extremely severe. The BAE estimates that in 1982-83 cash surpluses in the eastern States will be down by at least 50 per cent in both the agricultural and grazing industries and the horticultural industries. In New South Wales, currently the worst affected State, cash surpluses could be down by at least 70 per cent.
Both the interest payment and fodder subsidies will be totally funded by the Commonwealth. They are special initiatives for the duration of the current drought only, and they are both effective from 1 September 1982 for eligible farmers. They are a recognition of the fact that we are now facing potentially the worst rural disaster in our history.
This Bill provides specific funding for the two subsidies. Needless to say, it is extremely difficult to estimate what the overall actual cost might be, particularly as it is impossible to predict how long the drought will continue. Consequently, the funds appropriated in this Bill are based on the best available estimates of the effects of the drought, and the depressing assumption that the situation will not ease over the remainder of this financial year.
I should mention that there is nothing particularly unusual about not having firm estimates for natural disaster relief programs of this nature.
It is not possible accurately to budget for natural disasters and when they do occur it is the duty of the Government and the whole community to be prepared to provide adequate assistance.
Let me also stress that adequate provisions are being provided with regard to the administration of both of these subsidies to ensure that they are not abused. In particular, we will not allow Pitt and Collins Street farmers to take advantage of the interest payment subsidy. We are not in the business of helping part time farmers who also have outside incomes. We are in the business of helping the nation's full time farmers to stay on their properties through this very difficult period.
I now turn to the detail of the two subsidy arrangements.
Interest Payment Subsidy
This scheme will be subject to strict eligibility criteria. It will be available only to those involved in the business of primary production who are also, in normal circumstances, predominantly dependent on their farms for their living. The farm must be drought declared by the State. To obtain the subsidy on debt existing at 31 August

both the applicant and all other individuals with a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the farm must not have, in aggregate, readily available liquid assets exceeding 12 per cent of the eligible debt. This will allow eligible farmers to hold sufficient liquidity to meet their share of the interest payments. Furthermore, a farmer can become eligible at a subsequent date if evidence is provided that readily available liquid assets have been used to reduce debt to meet the 12 per cent eligibility criterion.
Examples of readily available liquid assets are cash deposits, term deposits, various forms of government bonds and securities, stocks and shares traded on the share market and income equalisation deposits. An individual with a direct or indirect beneficial interest in a farm is anyone who, by virtue of being a partner or share holder or trustee, derives some form of income from the farm operation. Provided a farmer meets all the eligibility criteria, he will pay the first 12 per cent of interest on eligible debt and the Commonwealth will pay the balance.
The subsidy will apply to interest payments on interest which is accrued since 1 September 1982 on eligible debt held at 31 August 1982. Debt must be for the purpose of primary production and most types of formal loans will be eligible, including solicitors' funds and hire purchase. Leasing is not included. The subsidy will also be paid on new debt advanced by banks and pastoral houses after 1 September where these lenders certify that it was for the purposes of carry-on necessitated by the drought. The subsidy will not be paid on loan charges, stamp duty, State loan taxes, et cetera; only on interest payments.
With regard to administration, application forms will be available from post offices and farmers will apply direct to the Department of Primary Industry in Canberra. Claims cannot be made until interest has either been paid or debited to the farmer's account; claims cannot be made more frequently than once a month; and payments will be made directly to the applicant by mail cheque. Farmers who believe they are eligible will need to complete detailed application forms and a claim form in respect of each loan on which the subsidy is being claimed. The farmer will be required also to complete a statutory declaration attesting to the truth of all information he provides and lenders will be required also to certify as to the details of the debit and that the interest has been paid.
These arrangements are necessary to ensure that there is no abuse of ths subsidy. There are severe penalties for false declarations or attempts

Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Bill 16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1557

to defraud the Commonwealth, including fines and up to four years gaol under the Crimes Act. The Commonwealth will provide $36m for this subsidy. This provision is based on estimates by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics that there are currently some 30,000 drought affected farmers with average interest rates exceeding 12 per cent. These farmers have average debts just over $32,000 per farm. Estimates prepared by my Department indicate that some 10,000 farmers ml,ly qualify immediately for the interest subsidy with an estimated further 17,000 likely to qualify if the drought continues for another 12 months.
Fodder Subsidy
This subsidy will apply to all fodder purchased from 1 September 1982 for feeding to drought affected sheep and cattle. It will be claimable once a month and there will be upper limits of 80c per sheep per month and $8 per cattle beast per month that can be claimed. The subsidy will be administered by the States under conditions and guidelines agreed with the Commonwealth. Claim forms will be available from, and claims should be submitted to, State agencies administering drought relief.
A farmer will have to purchase the fodder and complete an application form together with appropriate documentation and receipts before being paid the subsidy. A common form will be used throughout Australia and will be available through State administrations before the end of the month. If farmers sell fodder after 1 September then receipts from these sales will be debited against any subsidy entitlement before actual subsidy payments are made. Farmers will have to include as fodder sales feed wheat and feed barley. They will not have to include other wheat delivered to the Australian Wheat Board or its receival agents, or sales of malting barley. When making a claim for the subsidy the farmer will be required to sign a statutory declaration certifying the truthfulness of all the information included on the claim form-in other words, that he has purchased the fodder to feed to drought affected sheep and cattle that he owns, the number of sheep and cattle he is feeding, and details of any fodder sales. The subsidy will not be available on fodder purchased for feeding to sheep and cattle held in commercial feed lots.
The subsidy will be paid on all grain, fodder and manufactured stock feed purchased for feeding drought affected sheep and cattle. In the case of wheat, the subsidy will be 50 per cent of the purchase price, ex source. For other feeds the subsidy will be calculated on the basis of the feedstuff's nutrient value relative to wheat. Commonwealth

and State officials have agreed to a three category system for nutritive values, and this will operate uniformly throughout Australia. Category one will include fodders that are taken to have the same nutritive value as wheat; category two will include those that are taken to have a nutrient value of 67 per cent of wheat; and category three will include fodders with a nutrient value of 50 per cent of wheat. In no cases will the subsidy payment exceed 50 per cent of what the farmer paid for the fodder. Details of the relative nutrient values will be widely publicised, and will also be included on the back of the claim forms.
The Commonwealth's general philosophy is to allow the subsidy to be paid on all feed and supplements which are normally used or required in a particular State or region to keep sheep and cattle alive in a drought. The scheme is designed to prevent fodder prices from escalating abnormally. As the wheat price cannot be manipulated, if other fodders become too expensive, then logically farmers will switch to wheat. The Commonwealth will provide up to $320m for the fodder subsidy. This provision is based on current livestock numbers of about 14 million cattle and 93 million sheep on drought affected farms and the assumption that there will be a need to subsidise around 70 per cent of feed and grain fed to those sheep and cattle. The Government believes that these measures, together with changes and additions that it has suggested to the States to the core measures operating under the natural disaster relief arrangements, will provide much needed additional relief to drought stricken farmers. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Dawkins) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 9 September, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have the indulgence of the House to raise a point of procedure on this legislation. Before the debate is resumed on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill I suggest that it may suit the convenience of the House to have a general debate covering this Bill, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982 and the motions to take note of the papers: Report of the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting

1558 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

Commission and Consultants' Reports, and Government Decisions in Response to the Recommendations of the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. I suggest therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, that you permit the subject matter of the four orders of the day to be discussed in this debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) - Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering the four matters? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (3.56)-The Opposition does not oppose the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill which are included in the subject matter of this debate, although during the Committee stage of the Bills we will be proposing a number of amendments-amendments which if not successful here will be persisted with in another place. The nature of the debate allows the House to discuss not only the Bills that are before us but also the report of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission on the future of the ABC and the Government's response to the report of that Committee. The debate on that matter has to some extent been preceded by earlier contributions. But there may be some matters which I will want to refer to in the course of this debate.
It is, I suppose, an historic moment for the ABC that during its fiftieth year we should be debating legislation which will in a very real sense affect the Commission-now to be called the Australian Broadcasting Corporation-no doubt for the next 50 years. It is important, I think, that we record the Opposition's view that the ABC is a great national institution and has been a vital part of Australia's every day cultural life since it began in 1932. It continues to be Australia's largest media enterprise. It has built up a faithful following over the 50 years of its existence. However, it has never been in the historic position of being able to set the tone for broadcasting to the extent to which the British Broadcasting Corporation has. Increasingly, it has difficulty in deciding on its effective role in a world dominated by commercial broadcasting.
In recent years it has become clear that the ABC has problems. Internally, it seems plagued by uncertainty, low morale and acrimony in relationships between people of different functions and levels. It appears to be increasingly seen as poorly managed and an organisation in which creative talent is frustrated in career advancement

and professional expression. Program standards and originality have suffered. It has been something of a political football. It has had to withstand continual criticism from various politicians. As a large user of public funds the ABC has a difficult relationship with Federal governments. During the last five years in particular it has had its spending cut drastically. Whilst in some respects this may not necessarily have been bad, it has not in general assisted the professed aim of making the ABC more efficient. The greatest effect has been to exacerbate the chronic problem of low morale and internal dissension. Whilst increased spending is justified for the ABC, its shortcomings are not only ones of funding.
In 1979 the Fraser Government established the Dix Committee to inquire into the ABC. Although the motivtation for this is not altogether clear, the idea of a thorough inquiry was a good one. The Australian Labor Party endorsed the view that an inquiry of this sort should be held into the ABC every seven years. A careful examination of the Committee's report shows a sound diagnosis of the problems of the ABC. However, the report falls short in some of its prescriptions of what can be done about these problems. It appears to have done this in some cases through an unwillingness to come to grips with the internal politics of the ABC, through misunderstanding of political circumstances external to the ABC and through an apparently keen desire to present what it saw the Government wanting. Perhaps the best summary of the ABC's shortcomings is contained in the Dix report. It stated:
It has tried to maintain an idea of Australian society after that idea has undergone changes. Its energies have been sapped by often bitter industrial conflict. It has not only slipped from the forefront of change, but threatens to be eclipsed by it. The ABC has become slow-moving, overgrown, complacent, and uncertain of the direction in which it is leading, despite the efforts of many talented and dedicated people who work for it.
Having made an indictment like that, it was clearly incumbent on the Dix Committee to recommend ways to break the lethargy. It is clearly incumbent on government to accept these recommendations or to find and justify better ones. What is needed is reform of the ABC which is firm, clear in purpose but carried out in a spirit of respect and affection for the best principles of the public broadcasting service. The legislation which the Government has introduced is no doubt a very important step along the road to improving the operation of the ABC and to overcoming many of the problems which have beset it in the past and which beset it now.

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1559

The legislation involves a number of important changes. I will deal with some of those in my remarks now. Probably the most important change has been to replace the inadequate section 59 of the existing Act which requires the ABC in terms of its goals to provide an adequate and comprehensive service. That fairly vague and inadequate requirement is to be replaced with what the Government is calling a charter. The idea of a charter was certainly supported by the Australian Labor Party. It was our view that a charter dealing with the role of the ABC should be presented to Parliament and that it should have bipartisan support. The ABC is a very important means of providing information to the community and a very important means of providing for the publication of criticisms of society and the expression of minority points of view. But in the pursuit of those objectives it is incredibly important for an organisation such as the ABC to have the widest possible support of the whole community. The notion of at least commencing with the support of this House, and indeed of the whole Parliament, certainly is a step in the right direction. More important than that is the idea that a charter will to a great extent end the uncertainty, and arguments about that uncertainty, which has continued within the ABC and without it.
There has always been the problem that the ABC and the people who work within it have been unsure of their function. That uncertainty has been exacerbated by the increasing predominance of the commercial broadcasting sector. It has always been a matter of debate as to whether the ABC ought to cater just for special or minority interests or whether on the other hand it should provide a comprehensive service as wide in scope as, but one would hope better in quality than, the service provided by the commercial sector. We are pleased that the Government in providing this charter-while it is called a charter it is really just another clause of the Bill-has decided to clarify the role of the ABC. Clause 2 of the Bill states that the ABC is:
. . . to provide a balance between broadcasting programs--
That is radio programs--
and television programs of wide appeal and specialised broadcasting programs and television programs.
What is being required of the ABC in the future is that it should attempt both to satisfy the needs of the specialised broadcasting interests and at the same time to provide programming of very wide appeal. What is important however is that in pursuing this wider role-maybe it is a role which many people in the ABC have seen it as having in the past-in spelling it out and in clarifying it the

ABC should not suffer in terms of the quality of its programming. This will mean that the ABC will be more directly competitive with the commercial sector. I hope this will have a salutory effect on both the ABC and the commercial sector.
Mr Young-That is not what this Government wants.
Mr DAWKINS-One of the very unfortunate recent developments, largely as a result of the funding paralysis brought about by this Government, is the decline in the content of Australian produced drama. The honourable member for Port Adelaide rightly indicated that this Government is not concerned about the high quality of broadcasting on the ABC; it is not concerned about the production of high quality Australian drama. However, what I am congratulating the Government on is spelling out in the new charter the fact that the ABC does have the obligation to provide programs of wide appeal. One would hope that the Government will provide the ABC with the wherewithal to satisfy that requirement. It cannot do it under circumstances where it is starved for funds, where it simply would be incapable of competing with what in many instances is the fairly high quality programming material being produced by the commercial sector.
It simply is not good enough for the ABC to import material from overseas which is often of indifferent quality and expect that that will satisfy the requirement of the ABC to fulfill the obligation of providing programs of wide appeal. That is to say, we are not interested in the ABC broadcasting some of the sort of rubbish which the commercial sector has broadcast and continues to broadcast. It is also not the objective that the ABC should be duplicating the sorts of programs that the commercial sector is currently broadcasting. Perhaps the best description of what the ABC should be doing in the future, especially as a result of the new charter, came from a former chairman of the ABC, Sir Robert Madgwick, when he said that the ABC should 'do the same.thing, only do it better', that the commercial stations do. That seems to me to be the important objective. The ABC should have a commitment to quality and the Government should ensure that it has the wherewithal to satisfy that commitment. It is also important that the ABC as a public broadcaster, as the broadcaster which has access to the widest audience, recognises its duty to all Australians. It is therefore important that the old requirement of having adequate and comprehensive programs must remain, but the extra amplification is, of

1560 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

course, very welcome and the Opposition is happy to support it.
The next change I want to refer to relates to the decision of the Government in this legislation to cut the formal ties between the ABC and the Public Service Board. There has always been a difficulty in having the ABC constrained by the requirements of the rest of the Commonwealth Public Service. The ABC, as an organisation which is supposed to be out competing with the commercial sector and producing material of the highest quality with the widest appeal, needs to be flexible and vigorous. There have been instances in the past where the restrictions imposed-which are obviously necessary in some parts of the Public Service--were entirely inappropriate to an organisation such as the ABC. We hope that the Government ensures that the breaking of the ties between the ABC and the Public Service Board is in fact a real separation and that the Government does not allow the ABC just to reinvent the sorts of inflexibilities and the sorts of restrictions which exist currently-this time within the organisation itself. It is important, I think, that the ABC should take the opportunity-indeed, be forced to take the opportunity-to develop a totally new method of operation which takes full advantage of this new freedom.
The next point I want to refer to relates to the appointment of the newly named Board of the ABC. It has been decided that the old Commission should be replaced by a board. This provides a great opportunity for us to examine the way in which the membership of that Board ought to be selected. It has always been a matter of some contention, certainly between the Labor Party and the current Government but, I would imagine, within the community as well. If the ABC is to be an organisation which represents and responds to the needs of the whole community, it is vital that the membership of the Board, particularly when the Board is given new functions in the way in which this legislation intends, should be as widely representative of the community as possible and should have the widest possible support from the community. There is no question at all that articulate, vociferous and active vested interests will always criticise some of the actions of the ABC. There will always be charges of bias and there will always be charges that the ABC is not interested in a particular point of view. Even if the ABC was the best and most effective organisation in the world, those criticisms would still abound. To deal with those criticisms-this relates to the matter of complaints which I will come to later-it is even more important that the

membership of the Board be such that it has the widest possible support within the community.
We know that in the past the selection of members of the ABC has been a fairly political exercise. One need only examine the way in which this Government has made its selections for membership of the Commission during its incumbency to realise just how the Government has pursued this objective of getting rid of the appointees of the former Labor Government and putting on the board people who are more conducive to its frame of mind. It is important that we somehow move to break that sort of practice of governments. That is not the sort of thing that can be done in an excited or political way. It requires that we approach the matter sensibly and coolly. There ought to be a mechanism whereby appointments to the new Board of the ABC can receive the widest possible support both within the Parliament and within the community. It is a hopeless exercise to continue with the practice which has occurred in recent times whereby a Labor government makes appointments and the next government as soon as possible gets rid of those appointments and, as was done on this occasion, sticks on to the Commission three representatives of the National Civic Council. Whatever one's views of the National Civic Council, no one in their wildest dreams would imagine that it is representative of the Australian community.
Mr N. A. Brown-Who are they?
Mr DAWKINS-I do not intend to name them, but I will do so during the Committee stage if the Minister wishes. The Minister would know who they are.
Mr N. A. Brown-I do not know who they are.
Mr DAWKINS-In that case--
Mr N. A. Brown-Who do you say they are? It is a typical slur.
Mr DAWKINS-I will advise the Minister later. Since when has a member of the Liberal Party considered membership of the NCC to be a political slur? I am not saying that it is necessarily a political slur. I should have thought it would not matter whether we were talking about the NCC or the Communist Party of Australia. The point is that three members of the current Commission or the proposed Board should not come from a relatively minor group within the community.
Mr N. A. Brown-Who do you say they are?
Mr DAWKINS-I am not going to be diverted by the Minister. The point is that he knows the kinds of appointments that have been made. He also knows that it was not the objective of one of his predecessors to make those appointments.

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1561

Those appointments were made because the Government took the view that, in making appointments to the ABC, it had to pursue a political line and it had to ensure that the people on the ABC represented the Government's view of the world rather than being representative of society as a whole. The Minister should not take great exception to that. All I am saying is that the current practice is and always will be open to allowing any government to stack the Commission with people of its own point of view. That seems to me to be entirely unhelpful to the ABC in achieving a wider role.
What we have been proposing and will persist with on this occasion is that there ought to be a process whereby a parliamentary committee has the opportunity to vet proposed appointments to the ABC. Some might say that that is cumbersome and opens the way for all kinds of difficult precedents for all kinds of government bodies. I think the ABC is really in a class of its own in its role as a public broadcaster and in its role of providing information. In its role of presumably and hopefully pursuing a neutral political line, it is unique. Most other government bodies exist to implement or design policies which the Government wants to develop or implement. Therefore, the members of those bodies ought to be people who are competent to do the task which the Government sets them. The ABC is entirely different. The Opposition's proposal involves setting up the committee. Obviously that committee cannot actually make the appointments, but it ought to have the opportunity to examine the suggestions of the Minister, to propose others, and indeed to interview and discuss the merits of the various contenders for the positions. It may well be that the committee would accept the recommendations of the Minister on nearly all occasions, but the very existence of this process would ensure that the Minister put up names which were broadly acceptable to the whole community and obviously to the committee itself. The Opposition is certainly disappointed that the Government did not go at least some of the way towards achieving this particular objective. It would not have been cumbersome. It would have been a very important reform, a reform which the Labor Party in office would certainly want to pursue.
The next question I want to refer to is that dealing with complaints. It is proposed by the Government that there be established an Office of Commissioner for Complaints. We find this an objectionable innovation. It was not suggested by the Dix Committee, and indeed it is unclear where the proposal really came from. There is some

suggestion that it might have come from the Chairman of the ABC herself, but it is probably more likely that if it did Professor Kramer had in mind the sort of situation which exists within the British Broadcasting Corporation which, of course, is entirely different from the Office of the Commissioner for Complaints which has been proposed by the Government. What the Dix Committee did say was that the ABC should appoint in each State a community affairs officer to whom the public can address questions and complaints. It is well known that, partly because of the ABC's lack of staff, it is incapable at the moment of properly handling the complaints and questions that come to it. That is not to say that it does not take notice of those complaints. There is ample evidence of the fact that the ABC does try at the operational level to be responsive to the sorts of complaints it receives from the viewing public but it is incapable at the moment, because of a lack of resources, of handling those complaints adequately and, indeed, of responding to them.
I think we have to clarify what sorts of complaints are likely to be received in relation to the operation of the ABC. In the first case there might be the complaint that individuals are unfairly treated by the ABC. We have a recent clear example of this in the complaint by the Principal of the Perth Technical College. He made a complaint to the Ombudsman about what he thought was a thoroughly unfair treatment of his point of view relating to a matter in which he was involved. He tried to take up this matter with the Ombudsman because he thought that he had been misrepresented. He also thought that he had been denied unfairly the opportunity to clarify the matter when he raised it with the ABC in Perth. So there is that sort of instance where an individual's civil liberties might be affected or his position misrepresented. There may be other cases where the ABC in one way or another transgresses, through its treatment of individuals, their rights to privacy and so on. So there are those sorts of complaints, the sorts of complaints which the Ombudsman deals with in relation to all other government bodies-the infringement of civil liberties, for instance, by government organisations. It is very important that there be some mechanism for dealing with those sorts of infringements.
The Dix Committee was of the view that the Ombudsman did have the authority to investigate these kinds of complaints and simply left it at that. It has now transpired as a result of the instance that I referred to a moment ago concerning the Principal of the Perth Technical College that

1562 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

a great dispute is raging between the Ombudsman and the ABC about whether the Ombudsman does have powers to deal with such matters. The ABC for its part contends that the complaint, which has been referred to the Ombudsman and which the Ombudsman is trying to pursue, is one which relates to programming and therefore is not one with which the Ombudsman should properly deal. The Ombudsman has tried to clarify his role in his 1980 report in which he says:
I cannot review programming decisions made by the Commission in the exercise of its responsibilities as a national broadcaster unless there is some element of defective administration going beyond the merits of a programming decision, as for example where there is a complaint that there was a selection of material intended to prejudice the legitimate interests of some person.
I think the Ombudsman is perfectly right-in that statement. We believe that he ought to have the authority to investigate not the detailed matters of programming, not whether or not there is bias and not the quality of the material that is being broadcast, but certainly the sorts of complaints to which he has referred. Therefore we want to clarify the position beyond any doubt to ensure that the Ombudsman does have the power he claims. If we ensure that the Ombudsman has that sort of authority, that goes a long way towards removing the need for the commissioner of complaints. We are then left with the sorts of complaints which might deal with bias, the poor quality of material or the day to day operations of the ABC. It seems to us that the best way of dealing with that is to have the newly constituted Board of the ABC taking seriously its responsibilities in relation to those sorts of matters. That is what the Board is there for. That is why it is important for the Board to be broadly based and comprised of people who are broadly representative of the community.
We are concerned about the appointment of a new commissioner of complaints with the sort of draconian powers that are intended in this Bill. It may be argued that they are not much different from those of the Ombudsman but it has to be recognised that the Ombudsman has a very wide role. He is subject to very close and public scrutiny because of the breadth of his activities and, indeed, he has very wide experience in dealing with a variety of matters. If we establish a particular inquisitor within the ABC to deal only with ABC complaints, then we believe that such a position will be open to an incredible amount of misuse. We are particularly concerned, because we do not know of the origins of this proposal, that it may be an attempt to resuscitate the suggestion of the honourable member for Gippsland, the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), who on 12 November 1975 said that he wanted to have

somebody appointed to act as a sort of witch hunter for any pro-socialist' views, as he put it, within the ABC. It was an outrageous suggestion at the time that there was that sort of bias within the ABC, but there will always be complaints of bias. We are often complaining about the bias within the rural programs of the ABC, but to suggest that it can be sorted out in this way, by having a political monitor of the activities of the ABC, is outrageous. That is the role which ought to be performed by the Board of the ABC itself. It is the body which has to safeguard the interests of the community, it is the one which has to provide the guarantees of quality and the guarantees of neutrality. For that reason I will be moving amendments dealing with that point in the Committee stage. There are other matters on which I will be moving amendments but I will leave my remarks until the Committee stage.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (4.26)-The honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) at the beginning of his speech said that this was indeed an historic day for the Australian Broadcasting Commission. I would certainly agree with that point and, in fact, with many of the points he made about the difficulties that have been experienced by the ABC over the years. I believe that today we have introduced in this place a true liberal, rather than conservative, Bill to cover our national broadcasting situation. For that reason I think the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) and all of those involved in the preparation of the legislation should be congratulated. I do not think there is any doubt about the place that there was some concern that a new Australian Broadcasting Corporation could be that-an extreme right wing conservative sort of broadcasting organisation. One of the most appealing things for me about this legislation is the fact that it is liberal, that the independence of the ABC is now physically written into the legislation. That is something about which we were always very concerned. Now we have it on the statute books and that cannot be changed. I for one welcome that measure most sincerely indeed.
The new Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill certainly is not just a cosmetic device. It incorporates a whole new range of measures designed to equip the ABC well into the future. It is true that the ABC has served Australia well for the past 50 years. It is true that events have caught up with the ABC. Now it will certainly have the opportunity of re-establishing itself as one of the great broadcasting organisations of the world.

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1563

I was pleased to see that the Opposition welcomed the ABC charter. It is terribly important that the ABC knows exactly where it is going. I think we should spell out just what is involved in the charter. Sub-clause 6 (1) of the Bill sets out the functions of the new Australian Broadcasting Corporation which are to provide within Australia innovative and comprehensive services as part of the Australian broadcasting and television system consisting of national, commercial and public sectors, especially programs that contribute to national identity and inform and entertain and which reflect the cultural diversity of the Australian community. It also provides for educational programs. The charter provides, too, for the overseas service of the ABC, Radio Australia, to continue to exist under its control, providing an excellent service to people around the world.
I suppose that the most important thing that will come up in the near future of the ABC is the establishment of its Board of Directors and the ultimate appointment of its Managing Director. It is in this area that the whole future of the ABC will be made or broken. Once an organisation has its independence written into its legislation it is very much up to it to make sure that it takes full advantage of the situation. The organisation must work. I agree with the honourable member for Fremantle that the last thing we would ever want to see is a situation in which the turmoil and the problems in the structure, management and running of the ABC come to the fore again under a different guise. That would be absolutely disastrous.
Many of us would argue that the first thing that should be done with the ABC is a complete cleanout and a complete reappraisal of its staffing structure, and indeed many of the staff themselves. When I made my maiden speech in this House I expressed concern at the management structure of the ABC. I have said on subsequent occasions too that much of that ABC management structure has been rotten to the core. Now we have this opportunity to clean it out so that at least its staff have an opportunity to know exactly where they are going and those who control its financial strings know exactly what is going on.
We have seen some amazing cases in the Commission in recent years of misappropriation of moneys. This brings to mind a court case in Brisbane just a couple of years ago in which misappropriation of funds within the commission was brought out. Indeed hundreds of thousands of dollars were involved. It is all very well for us to stand up here and say that the ABC has been deprived of funds over the years. It is true that it has

undergone cuts. We have to see where those cuts were made, some of the ridiculous decisions that were made in terms of the staff cuts and, of course, where so much of the money that was allocated to the ABC-they have been big sumshas been squandered and completely wasted.
One of the sad things that evolved in recent years was that the ABC suffered in terms of its equipment. It has been sad to see ABC news crews around the streets using cameras IS or 20 years old when their commercial counterparts have had access to new equipment and electronic gear for their news gathering techniques. That is probably a typical example of circumstances. A new table tennis facility might have been provided, an extra driver might have been put on or in fact an extension might have been made to some ABC executive's home whereas money was not spent on equipment, as it should have been. That is the sort of process that unfortunately has crept into the Commission in recent years and that is the sort of thing that must now be cleaned up. If we can get that restructuring going we are certainly well and truly along the way to getting the ABC back to its rightful place as one of the world's most dynamic broadcasting organisations. The ABC once again has a clear mandate to operate Radio Australia which provides a most worthwhile service not only to other countries but also to Australian residents who are going overseas. I think we should be more than complimentary about the service that Radio Australia has provided over the years.
The other thing that I think is important in respect to this Bill is that it spells out the place the ABC now enjoys and shares within the whole broadcasting sector. It is clearly stated that we have a system comprising the commercial and public sectors and that the ABC must now provide balance between mass appeal and specialised programs. The ABC should not be a copy of commercial stations or, indeed, the local public stations. Certainly, one would think, especially in the radio area, that perhaps it has tended to do that in recent days because some of the material broadcast, especially on the first network, would certainly be regarded as sub-standard. I do not talk about its current events or news programs, or indeed its talk back programs but so much of the ABC programs these days would seem to be just fill. The standard process seems to be to buy a burnt-out, second-rate commercial radio disc jockey, put him on the ABC, give him a handful of records and let him go. The last thing we want to see the ABC develop into is another commercial rock and roll station.
There must be a lot of room for ABC programmers still to move under this new arrangement to

1564 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

get more constructive programs, even in the light music field. It is also, of course, written into its charter that it has to cover and promote music, drama and other performing arts. There is a lot of room to move. One would hope that when we look back in a couple of years time we will see that so many of those opportunities were taken.
One of the views that seem to be afoot in the community is that the ABC is now obliged to take its news from Australian Associated Press.
Indeed, within the legislation there is now the right for the ABC to buy external news sources. That is all it is. It is just a right; it is not a command. But this gives the ABC another option. I would think that ABC news personnel would welcome that initiative because over the years they have been denied the right of access to some of those news agency reports. I hope that that advantage is taken up so as to free many of the journalists who work within the new Corporation, to get them away from some of the hack work they are presently involved in, to move them on to more specialised areas and, indeed, more in-depth investigative reporting. One would hope that, rather than see them being compelled to take that course, they would realise the real situation, that
that is an option for them to take. One could hope that they take up that option and make the most of it.
I refer now to the complaints commission because that was mentioned by the honourable member for Fremantle. I certainly expressed concern at some stage that we were setting up another bureaucracy inside the ABC and that the work done by the complaints commission could probably be better handled by the Commonwealth Ombudsman. However, for the reasons given by the honourable member for Fremantle, in the short term that course is not available. One would hope that perhaps later on we can look at that problem again and see whether we can solve it. There is a need for the general public to have some access when they feel that they have been wronged by something broadcast by the ABC. I suppose most members of this House from time to time would have received complaints about material broadcast by the Commission. If somebody has been grievously wronged he has a right to lodge a complaint. The only thing that worries me is that there might be a feeling within the community that this facility is open to everybody. One hopes that it will not be abused. There are some real concerns about some of the material broadcast by the ABC. I suppose the most recent example of that was the coverage of the Falkland Islands war. My phone ran hot with people objecting to the type of coverage given by the ABC.

A lot of people told me they believed that the coverage was biased. In fact many of the complaints seemed to follow a similar line to those lodged with the British Broadcasting Corporation, and the BBC obviously had its share of problems as well.
Mr Barry Jones-It might have been the same people.
Mr JULL-It could have been.
Mr Barry Jones-It applied to the Falkland Islands as well.
Mr JULL-Yes, but I suppose the Falkland Islands coverage was the first instantaneous television news coverage of something as close to home as that. The only objection I have about the coverage we saw on the ABC-most of the coverage would have been originated by the BBCwas that it was after the style of a football match: At half time the score was British battleships 3; Argentinian aircraft 2. I had some reservations about the standard of reporting. The effect it had on the community, not only the British based citizens within Australia but also amongst Australians as well, was amazing. If there is some opportunity for them to express some of the concerns they might have about some of these issues, then obviously this particular section is necessary. But I sincerely hope that ultimately we will look at referring complaints back to the Ombudsman if possible.
The next move that will have to be made by the Government is the establishment of the board of directors of the ABC. Under the new Corporation that is a most important task. One would hope that when the decision is made to appoint personnel we would be looking at getting a total balance of every area that is possibly needed within the Corporation. I think in the past there has been appointed to the Australian Broadcasting Commission people who probably did not have a great deal to contribute to the policy and the direction in which the ABC was going. One would hope, for example, that we would have some hard-nosed businessmen who would be taking their position on the board of directors; that we would have involved people who knew something about media, who had media experience and a capacity to provide to the ABC that sense of direction that in many respects has been missing for so long; and that consideration would be given to cover minority groups and ethnic groups within those appointments, so that we can get a good cross-section.
Mr Birney-And sport.

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1565

Mr JULL-The honourable member for Phillip has just remined me that sport should probably be considered. Indeed, the ABC places great emphasis on sport. Australia has been very lucky in the sporting coverage it has had from the ABC. Certainly we do not want the new Corporation to become a rest home for peope who have probably served the community well and whose appointment would be regarded as some sort of reward. What I am really saying is-
Mr Barry Jones-Have you got anyone in mind?
Mr JULL-I have a few people in mind who should go on the Board.
Mr Barry Jones-I thought you meant someone who was already on.
Mr JULL-Somebody once described a meeting with the Australian Broadcasting Commission as being akin to a croquet test between England and Scotland in terms of the excitement. That may be a little unkind. I have attended a couple of the Commission luncheons and nave had some quite frank discussions with some of its members. But I think we are over that stage. We are over the afternoon tea club stage. If we are putting that sense of responsibility on the corporation we have to make sure that we have the best possible personnel to play their role in the management structure of the ABC so that we can clean it up.
I think the ABC has been a very sad organisation in recent years. Certainly my contacts with its staff have revealed a feeling of almost hopelessness in some areas, especially in the production field. This is the opportunity to get that situation right too. One of the saddest things that I think has happened over the year is that many of the very talented people who have worked for the ABC have experienced nothing but utter frustration in their relations with management and some of the more senior personnel within the Commission. Of course, they have done the obvious thing and have got out. Some got out of the ABC and went into the commercial arena. Some got out of the industry altogether. In many respects I think it is sad that we should lose some of those very talented people from the industry altogether.
The ABC has made some marvellous programs in the past. It now has a greater opportunity to play its role in international productions as well because many of the restrictions will be lifted in that area. I know that a number of countries have expressed a great deal of interest in making more combined productions with the Australian people. In fact, there is a great acceptance overseas of Australian television programs. Whether it

be in the United States of America as a roll-on from the success of our film industry or in the Nordic countries, where a number of Australian programs have had a great deal of success, the future is obviously very bright. If the ABC can get its financing right, move into those joint ventures and prove that it has the wherewithal to make these international productions on a regular basis, obviously the opportunities are almost limitless. One would hope that, under the new structure, it would be able to enter into ventures not only with these overseas organisations but also with some of the larger Australian organisations so that it can get into the international television market. Certainly the interest is there, there is a great deal of money to be made and there is a great deal of opportunity for very real Australian talent to play its role in this newly structured Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Whether the report of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission-which report we have been discussing around the community for the last few months-will lead to the ABC firmly establishing itself as one of the world's great broadcasters depends on the talent and the dedication of all those people who have been entrusted with this new policy direction and the management of the Corporation. I think that sentiment goes right the way down the line throughout the new Corporation. I suppose what we are really saying to the members of the newly structured ABC, once it gets underway, is: The ball is in your court. Indeed, your future is in your own hands. You now have to go out there and prove that those things about which you have been complaining-the things that you say you could have done if you were given the opportunity-can be done because the opportunity is now yours. You are completely independent and your charter is there'. One would hope that all members of the newly formed ABC would take that advantage and make their contribution over the next 50 years and beyond to what really can be one of the world's great broadcasting organisations.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (4.46)-The Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982 will be a new Act of Parliament which will herald the coming of the new Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Whilst I have a few carps-which I will get to later-in general I welcome this measure. The Australian Broadcasting Corporation Billall 107 clauses of it-derives mainly from the report of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, which was one of the most important documents to come before this House in regard to the Australian Broadcasting Commission and broadcasting in general. It

1566 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

truly was, as the title of the document suggests, the ABC in review. The new board of directors should make for a more streamlined and professional approach to broadcasting with the new advisory councils and committees. The new Corporation Board is instructed to establish an advisory council under the name the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Advisory Council which will furnish advice to the Board on a range of issues but mainly those matters relating to broadcasting and television programs. There is provision also for the Board to establish, if it sees fit, advisory councils in each State and Territory in Australia.
The whole Corporation structure seems much better than that of the old Commission and should benefit the ABC in its work. However, the board of directors will be appointed by the government of the day. That is a situation which honourable members on the Opposition side of the House have argued against ever since the Dix report was released. In fact in my speech in this House on 23 March this year, when debating the Dix report, I said:
An alternative method must be found. I think that the only solution is a joint parliamentary committee, possibly one emanating from the House of Representatives. My thoughts in this matter are that there should be six members of the Committee-three from the Government and three from the Opposition, with the chairman, who would be a Government member, having a casting as well as a deliberative vote. However, this Committee should not hold public inquiries. It should operate more or less like the existing House of Representatives committees such as the Standing Committee on Expenditure and the Joint Standing Committee of Public Accounts, by which subjects are investigated and recommendations are then reported to the Parliament.
I do not wish to debate the finer points involved with the setting up of this parliamentary committee at this stage as the Opposition will be moving an amendment to this aspect of the Bill during the Committee stage. However, the present system of direct government appointments has not served the ABC well in the past. An alternative must be found. I am glad to see a charter written into the Bill. Whilst it is not perfect, it is an improvement and at last sets out guidelines for the ABC which surely must aid administrators and programmers alike. It also for the first time states quite clearly that the ABC should be a mass appeal programmer as well as a specialised or minority programmer-a mixture to 'inform and entertain and reflect the cultural diversity of the Australian community'. That is but a small part of the new Corporation's charter. We now have a board and a charter, advisory committees and councils which we hope will work smoothly.
I turn now to two areas that concern me. Firstly, the establishment of the office of Commissioner for Complaints; and, secondly, the

transfer of officers and employees from Telecom Australia to the ABC with all the detailed responsibility and functional responsibility being transferred to the ABC. I will deal now with each of those points. Whilst we believe that there must be an avenue for people to complain, I really doubt the wisdom of the provision for a Commissioner for Complaints. When all the pieces are put together it makes one's imagination run riot. Imagine a Commissioner for Complaints running around with his little notebook ready for action, firing bullets at any ABC person who zigs instead of zags. This position, as it is proposed, could also be used in a rather political way to investigate virtually any news item that someone thinks is biased or it could be the platform for a whole range of lunatic groups or organisations that wish to run a campaign against the ABC or some of its personnel. The member for Bowman (Mr Jull) alluded to that. He said he hoped that would not happen, but I certainly believe it will happen. The whole proposal, as set out in the legislation, is fraught with danger. Dix did not recommend it as such. We have proposed an amendment to this section which we will be moving at the Committee stage of the Bill. I believe the Commonwealth Ombudsman should move into this arena-a place where he should have the jurisdiction. He is in a position to look after the complaints in regard to the Corporation.
The second area of concern is the shifting of Telecom duties and employees to the ABC. That, of course, relates to transmitters. There cannot be the efficiency or scale of economies there are at present in Telecom. This part of the Bill is directly against the advice of Dix. I ask the Minister: Why? All evidence points to the conclusions reached by Dix. It seems strange that the Government has seen fit to overturn decisions of Dix and the expert consultants who reported to Dix in regard to engineering whose reports can be read in the engineering section of the report-volume 4. We will be moving amendments in regard to this section during the Committee stage and I will have more to say at that time. The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) in his second reading speech stated:
It is sometimes said that the ABC can never be truly independent while it is dependent for funding on Budget appropriations. I have never seen the reality of the argument that Government funding of the ABC implies subservience to the Government's will. Any Government that tried to cripple the ABC by needlessly withholding funds would quickly lose community support.
Basically I agree with that. However, the facts are that this Government has tried to cripple the ABC. The -last Australian Labor Party Government appropriation in 1975 saw the ABC receive

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1567

$132.1 m. However, the first three years of the Fraser Government saw this figure rise to only $141.5m-a rise of only a fraction over 7 per cent. The inflation rate in those three years would have been approximately 33 per cent. On the one hand there are appropriation increases to the ABC of 7 per cent and on the other hand the rate of inflation is 33 per cent. I do not believe the Government really is fair dinkum when it says that we should increase the size of the ABC and make it independent, unless the Government funds it appropriately. Now the Government is pretending that it is the saviour of our national broadcaster. I hope that any Federal government will take a responsible line and give adequate funds-and appropriate rises in those funds every year-to enable the new national broadcaster to operate in the professional manner in which it should. We are in an ever increasingly complex broadcasting and television system, one in which the ABC must share, complement and compete for the good of all Australians.
The programming section of the Dix report is very well worth reading as it covers a whole range of programming subjects and ideas. The Minister's response to the Dix report on 4 july-one of the matters we are debating today-quickly passed over some parts of the programming section. However, I would like to enlarge on that matter as well as comment on what the Minister said. These are all matters brought up in this legislation today. The first part relates to the charter. There are some very interesting parts of the Dix report. Paragraph 11.7 on page 229 of the report states:
Provided that the ratings are kept firmly in their place, the Committee of Review consider that the ABC should be free to serve 'the diversity of interests of the Australian public', as Justice in Broadcasting urges. This means that the ABC should inform, illuminate, inspire, educate and also entertain. In this way, it will do much to satisfy the demand evident in the ANOP survey findings that its program should provide for the 'general community' rather than for the sections of the community that the commercial stations do not cater for.
There is a very good part on page 236. Paragraph 11.38 states:
It is impossible for us to define what is 'right' for a public service broadcasting undertaking, and what is 'not right'. But in a healthy, properly-orientated ABC, there will be a 'feel' for these matters, and a sensitivity towards them. We are confident that the ABC will find plenty of good entertainment potential withir. its own voluntary limits, while leaving to its commercial counterparts considerable areas beyond these limits for quite proper exploitation in their own fashion.
Part of that came up in the charter which, I agree, is an improvement. It may not be perfect but it is an improvement. It gives the ABC very good guidelines for the future. One matter the Minister moved on to in his reply of 4 July was that the

Government would be asking the Commission to extend its services in regard to the arts. On page 247 of the Dix report there are two very interesting and contrasting submissions. One submission is from the Australia Council and one submission is from the Australia Council Theatre Board. The first submission from the Australia Council states:
Radio and television broadcasts of live performance from theatres and concert halls should be increased. These programs are less costly than studio productions; they also convey the aura of live performances to audience unaccustomed to attending theatres and concert halls . . .
On the same page in regard to the same subject, the Theatre Board states:
However, it believes there is no justification, just because it is cheaper, for a succession of televised performances on the rational that it saves re-staging costs and can reach larger numbers of people than can be accommodated in a theatre. In its professional view-
I emphasise the word 'professional'-
the integrity of the original production can be undermined by this type of staging . . .
It is very interesting to see those contrasting view points. I am quite staggered that the original Australia Council submission stated what it did. It makes one wonder about some of the people involved in the Australia Council-the people involved in writing that submission-and, in fact, how professional they are. The Minister also referred to the area of sport which has also been mentioned by the honourable member for Bowman. On page 256 some very good points are made in relation to sport and leisure. I want to refer to them quickly. The report states:
The Committee believes it is now time for the ABC to make a thorough review of both its allocation of time to sport, and its sporting emphasis . . .
The report went on to state:
We consider that the Commission has in the past devoted rather too much time to sport at the expense of other programs--
I might not entirely agree with that-
and we trust this may inevitably decrease with the loss of rights to major events or series. There is, however, an opportunity for the ABC to capitalise on this situation by making a marked change in its policy on sport, and there are signs that this is already happening.
In, for example, Victoria, ABC radio has a very big sporting day on Saturdays. The ABC broadcasts what is called a popular sport-Australian Rules football. That is very well thought of and well listened to. I think it is appreciated by many people. So there are two contrasting views in the sporting area which I think can be accommodated. On page 260 of the report-and I hope the ABC and the Government take up this recommendation-paragraph 11.142 states:
We recommend that the Commission initiate a thorough review of its sporting output, with particular reference to:

1568 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

There are several points listed. The last one states:
the potential for expanding the role of the Sporting Department to produce a much wider range of programs, especially in the field of the creative and physically beneficial use of leisure time.
The recommendation states:
We recommend that the Commission consider setting up an ad hoc advisory committee to undertake this review . . .
I agree with that. I hope the ABC and, in fact, the Government pursue this point. As I have said in this place before, I think leisure time and the whole leisure industry will be particularly important in the coming years. This may well be a very big opening for the ABC to move into and to fill a vacuum. I sincerely hope that the ABC takes this matter seriously, looks at it in this way and is given encouragement by the Minister, who is sitting at the table, and the Government. I move on to the industrial area. The Minister, on page 13 of his initial response to the Dix report, said:
Removal of the statutory relationship with the PSB-That is, the Public Service Board-also brings into question the continued jurisdiction of the Public Service Arbitrator and the Government has agreed that the possibility of moving the ABC to the jurisdiction of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission should be examined by the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations.
I agree with that action. I hope that jurisdiction is moved to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. I have written to the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) in those terms expressing those thoughts to him. The ABC is part of the broadcasting and television industry. That is a fact that must be taken account of by the new Corporation if we are to have a vigorous and professional national broadcaster, one that will live up to the new charter that is outlined in this legislation. Any attempt at bureaucratic stacking will be a disaster for the new Corporation. I have been informed that there is a little jockeying for the position at present, before this legislation hits the deck. I would not have thought it would have made a great difference, but I hear that some of it is occurring. I remind the House once again of what is stated in the Dix report under the industrial relations section in regard to staffing. Paragraph 22.196 of the report states:
Taking into account these inadequacies of categorisation they have concluded that approximately 30 per cent of ABC staff could be classified as clerical/administrative/ professional--
This is round about the appropriate percentage of back-up for any organisation--
10 per cent as physical grades, and 60 per cent as programrelated staff.
If that assessment is correct, the ABC is more closely aligned to the broadcasting industry than

to the Public Service. I hope the ABC does see that and moves in that direction. If the ABC is to attract the right people, whether to its staff or on a casual or contractual basis, as there are many contractual people within the industry, the recommendations of the Dix report and the legislation before us must be taken note of. When taking note of the legislation, I am concerning myself with the flexibility that the legislation gives the Corporation in the running of its operations and programs. Some of the flexibility comes from clause 25 (3), paragraphs (c) and (d), which allows the ABC to enter into an agreement or arrangement with an outside producer of programs or concerts for the production or joint production of those programs or concerts for the ABC. Let us hope this flexibility flows through to the Corporation's Board and management.
The subject of a second national television network is one in which I am very interested. No matter how it is structured, I believe we will see the advent of a second network some time in the not too distant future. The two national television networks may run along similar lines to the existing radio networks. One network would specialise in minority tastes, while the other network would involve itself more in the general entertainment area. I believe that this dual network setup for our national broadcaster is inevitable and should be a welcome part of our communications network in the future. I agree that now is possibly not the right time but, as I have said, some time in the not too distant future I am sure we will see moves in that direction.
I refer quickly to regional areas. One of the most important points of the Dix Committee recommendations was a proposal for regionalisation of ABC activities and strengthening the services available to country or non-metropolitan listeners and viewers. The importance of this can be illustrated by reference to a number of areas, but the imbalance can best be illustrated by reference to north Queensland, where the ABC has totally inadequate staff and facilities to deal with a potential audience of some 400,000, Mr Deputy Speaker, as you would probably know. The ABC radio and television services, offices and studios in Townsville, for example-I do not see the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean) in the House-should be upgraded to standard to permit it to function as a responsible regional centre. I was informed not too long ago that the radio networks that come into Cairns and Townsville mainly emanate from Brisbane or Sydney. In fact, on one day of the week listeners have only three minutes of radio coming from the local centre, which is just not good enough.

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1569

Te1evision services and particularly radio stations are of the utmost importance to people living in remote areas. The provision of information and entertainment to people in these areas should be of high priority. With its present resources the ABC cannot cope with that task. There is a particular need for a second radio network, and a Hayden Labor Government would give this top priority. The legislation is good and I am glad to see it in this House, apart from the few carps I have which will be brought up in the Committee stage.
It is a big day for the ABC. We welcome the advent in the broadcasting section of our communications industry of a new corporation, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Debate (on motion by Mr Tambling) adjourned.
ASIA DAIRY INDUSTRIES (HONG KONG) LTD AND AUSTRALIAN
DAIRY CORPORATION
Ministerial Statement
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primarylndustry)-by leave-On 29 October 1981, I addressed the House on the audit inspection of the accounts and records of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, known as ADI and on the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries. The purpose of this statement is to report to the Parliament on matters that I foreshadowed in my earlier statement would be the subject of further action or inquiry. These matters are: Rebate arrangements which applied to Australian Dairy Produce Board and ADC sales of skim milk powder to Holland Milk Products Inc., known as HOMPI, during the period 1974 to 1977; the ownership, future use and control of the dairying industry stabilisation fund; general issues of principle relating to statutory authorities raised by the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations in its report on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries; and the question of whether any breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade skim milk powder minimum pricing arrangements had occurred apart from those made under the HOMPI arrangement.
On the first of these matters, the HOMPI rebate arrangement, a brief statement of the background may be of assistance to honourable members. HOMPI is a company incorporated in the Philippines and engaged there in the manufacture and sale of milk and milk products. The

ADC holds 13 1/3 per cent of the share capital. Other shareholders are Holland Canned Milk International, a Dutch dairy manufacturying cooperative, owning 262/3 per cent, and G.F. Equity incorporated, an investment and management company incorporated in the Philippines owning 60 per cent. The principal shareholders in G.F. Equity Inc. are Messrs. W. Uytengsu and G. Young, who are also President and Vice-President respectively of HOMPI.
During the period in question-December 1974 to December 1977-The Australian Dairy Produce Board and, from 1975, its successor the ADC were major suppliers of skim milk powder to HOMPI. In its report on the ADC and its Asian subsidiaries, the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations drew attention to a $25 per tonne rebate on some ADC shipments of skim milk powder to HOMPI that was not paid to HOMPI but to a bank account in Singapore. Honourable members will recall that in my earlier statement. I said that I wanted to obtain further information on this matter and find out whether the ADC's involvement was appropriate. To this end I requested the Auditor-General to undertake an examination of all aspects of the rebate arrangement, including the accounting procedures by which the money was transferred from Australia; the amount and nature of funds remitted overseas by the ADC to be paid into a Singapore account; the agreement by which the original equity in this account was disposed of; and the ultimate disbursement from and closure of the account. I submitted this request to the Auditor General in a letter dated 10 November 1981 and I now table that letter. The Auditor-General reported to me on 27 April 1982, and subsequently on 11 August 1982 he advised me of a typographical error in the report. I hereby table both his report and his letter of 11 August 1982. As the Auditor-General's letter was critical of some past actions by the ADC, the Corporation was given the opportunity to respond. Its reply is contained in a document dated 12 July 1982, and I now table that paper. The Auditor-General has been given the opportunity to comment on the ADC response, but his office has replied that it does not believe its role properly extends to any follow up action within the Executive Government that might flow from the Auditor-General's report. I table this letter, dated 10 August, 1982.
The Auditor-General's report was also referred to the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor for advice and I will have more to say on this aspect later. In the meantime, I table the Crown Solicitor's letter, dated 22 June 1982.

1570 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

In brief the audit examination indicates that in December 1974 the Australian Dairy Produce Board and Asia Dairy Industries contracted to supply HOMPI with not less than 12,000 tonnes annually of skim milk powder at competitive prices, this contract to remain in force from year to year unless terminated by mutual agreement of the parties. The Australian Dairy Produce Board, and the ADC when it succeeded the Board, invoiced HOMPI at a rate per tonne that did not allow for various rebates, commissions and other adjustments to which HOMPI was entitled. Such adjustments were effected by the raising of credit notes. On shipments of skim milk powder during the period to September 1976 credit notes were issued totalling $3,079,145. This total includes credits of $1,840,223 in respect of approved price reductions, $689,516 in respect of a $25 per tonne volume purchase rebate, and $183,148 in respect of a 2 per cent commission.
HOMPI remitted invoiced amounts in full, and these remittances were credited to the skim milk powder reimbursement account at the Reserve Bank of Australia, Melbourne. Funds equivalent to the credit notes were thus accumulated in this account. Such funds were transferred, from time to time, on the instruction of ADC staff, to the Chartered Bank, Singapore, for the account of-I quote from the Auditor-General's report-the Chartered Bank, Hong Kong, per instructions of Mr Wilfred Uytengsu or Mr George Young. Mr Uytengsu, it will be recalled, is the President of HOMPI, Mr Young is Vice-President. Interest totalling some $54,883 that had accrued in respect of credit note entitlements was paid to HOMPI, Manila, not to the Singapore account. The original intention of Mr Uytengsu concerning equity in the funds transferred to the Singapore account is unclear. But given the arrangements among the parties, the Auditor-General considered that the funds belonged to HOMPI which, I repeat, is a Philippines company. There is no evidence, however, that they were at any time reflected in the financial statements of HOMPI.
On 15 November 1976 it was agreed between HOMPI and the ADC that the volume purchase rebate of $25 per tonne be continued on ADC sales of skim milk powder to HOMPI but-I quote again from the Auditor-General's reportmade ex financial account in Singapore and not to exceed the total held in that account to the credit of the Australian Dairy Corporation. The Auditor-General has reported that the ADC share of the funds in the Singapore account would have been. fully utilised under this arrangement with a shipment of skim milk powder on 3 December 1977.

So far as actual disposition of the funds in the Singapore bank account is concerned, according to documentation produced by Mr Uytengsu, the entitlement of Holland Canned Milk International, arising from its shareholding in HOMPI, was required to be paid to a bank account in Switzerland. The Auditor-General was not able to ascertain from Mr Uytengsu the name of the holder of the Swiss account. Apart from the amount stated to have been paid to the Swiss account for Holland Canned Milk International and an amount said by Mr Uytengsu to have been distributed as an incentive bonus to employees, the balance of the funds in the Singapore account appears to have been paid to, or retained by, G. F. Equity Inc. G. F. Equity, it will be recalled, is the third and major shareholder in HOMPI and has as its principal shareholders Messrs Uytengsu and Young.
According to the Auditor-General's report, Mr Uytengsu had indicated that the Singapore bank account was closed on 16 March 1979 after payments were made to Holland Canned Milk International and G. F. Equity. It is also reported by the Auditor-General that he was unable to obtain evidence of payments made to either company or of the closure of the account. Honourable members will recall that the last aspect was one of those on which I asked the Auditor-General to report. But, in light of the fact that the ADC equity in this account had been exhausted in 1977, the closure of the account is not now seen as a matter of direct concern to the Australian Government.
The Auditor-General's report provides further evidence to that given in his earlier report on the audit inspection of the accounts and records of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, known as ADI of improper or inadequate management and accounting arrangements that existed within the ADC and AD! during the 1976 and 1977 period. In this regard, honourable members will recall that, following receipt of the earlier report of the Auditor-General, the ADC established a special management committee to examine and report on managerial and accounting practices. Following receipt of the ADC management committee report I concluded that action was immediately required to overcome certain deficiencies in the management and financial control of ADI. I have already reported to the Parliament, in my statement of 29 October last year, the action that has been taken in this regard.
The information available from the latest Auditor-General's report also lends weight to the conclusion that in 1976 and 1977 the actions of the ADC led to a breach of the then applying

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1571

GATT skim milk powder minimum pricing arStanding Committee made several observations in

rangement. The Government will not tolerate respect of the DISF, and these can be summarised

such activity and the ADC has been formally directed to ensure that, in the fulfilment of its statutory functions and responsibilities, there is strict compliance with Australia's current responsibilities under the GATT international dairy agreement.
Accordingly, the Corporation has advised exporters that they are required to observe the GATT minimum prices when arranging the sale of dairy products. I might add that I will have no hesitation in cancelling the export licences of any exporters reported to me by the ADC, whom I find to be in breach of these export conditions.

as follows:
No clear, undisputed evidence is available to show that any single group in the dairy industry is entitled to claim beneficial or legal ownership of the funds.
So long as the DISF remains in existence, it should be expended in accordance with section 11 of the Dairying Industry Act.
If ADI is to be sold or ownership transferred in any way, the DISF should not be made available to any single group within the industry to purchase ADI.

As I have already mentioned, the Auditor General's report was referred to the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor. The reason for this was to seek the Crown Solicitor's opinion as to whether or not the Auditor-General's report disclosed a prima facie case on which any individual in Australia might be prosecuted. In his reply of 22

As the co-operative and proprietary companies, which largely generated the funds which formed the basis for the DISF, have disappeared or merged with other proprietary or co-operative companies, the return of those funds would be administratively difficult and inequitable.

June 1982, the Crown Solicitor stated that on the
material contained in the Auditor-General's report he did not think it was possible to conclude that there is prima facie evidence of the commission of any offence in Australia by any person. The Crown Solicitor noted that there may, however, have been a breach of Singapore or Philippines law, but said that, as at present advised, he could see no useful purpose being served by pursuing this aspect of the matter. From the Government's point of view, the question of a possible breach of Singapore or Philippines law is a matter for the authorities of those countries. However,
let me reiterate most strongly a point I made in my statement of 29 October last year, that is that the Government is most concerned that the agencies of statutory authorities abide by the letter and

The Commonwealth Government, on behalf of the Australian taxpayers, is entitled to a claim to the ownership of the DISF which, at the very least, ranks equally with dairy industry groups.
The question of the 'ownership' of the DISF should be the subject of a more explicit statement by the Government than was made in the memorandum of the Minister for Primary Industry of 26 June 1979.
In my view, because the funds originally used to establish the DISF were derived from export sales of dairy produce and were, at that time, clearly the property of the industry, it would be difficult to justify a taxpayer claim on the present assets of the fund.

intent of the laws of the countries in which they In my statement to the House on 29 October

operate, at all times.

1981 I announced that I had asked my Depart-

Finally, in respect of this matter, honourable members will note that there is a considerable difference of opinion between the Auditor-General and the ADC on certain aspects of the Auditor General's report. I do not propose to canvass these differences of opinion. It is, however, worth pointing out that the ADC management group did find in its general overview that the summary of events prepared by the Auditor-General was, with some exceptions, a reasonable assessment of the circumstances.
Dairying Industry Stabilization Fund

ment to meet with representatives of the ADC and the dairy industry to consider the Senate Committee's recommendations and to report to me on the matter. These discussions have now been completed and agreement was reached in May this year that the fund should continue to be used for the benefit of the industry generally and in accordance with section 11 of the Dairying Industry Act. To assist in clarifying the future use and control of the Fund guidelines have been drawn up by my Department in consultation with representatives of the Australian Dairy Industry Conference and the Corporation. I have approved

now turn to the matter of the ownership, . the guidelines and I hereby table a copy. Honour-

future use and control of the Dairying Industry able members will note that expenditure from the Stablization Fund, known as DISF. The Senate fund will continue to be on the recommendation

1572 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

of the Corporation after consultation with the Conference and will require my approval.
General Guidelines for Statutory Authorities
As honourable members know, the Senate Committee's report raises many general issues of principle such as ministerial control of statutory authorities, including powers of direction; the development of suitable guidelines for the establishment, operation and accountability of statutory authorities and subsidiary companies; the duties and responsibilities of members of such authorities and companies; and reporting requirements. I said in my earlier statement that these general issues of principle were under consideration by an interdepartmental committee and I thought that the Government should be in a position to comment on them by the time. I again reported to the Parliament. This task, however, has not yet been completed. When it is a statement will be made by the Government.
Breaches of the GATT Minimum Pricing Arrangements Other than Those under the
HOMPI Arrangements
In conjunction with my earlier statement. I tabled a report by the ADC on the question of whether any breach of the GATT skim milk powder minimum pricing arrangements had occurred apart from those made under the HOMPI arrangements. This ADC report drew attention, in respect of Corporation sales, to sales made to Mexico between June and November 1976 for which the lack of documentation on some aspects may have been a cover for a possible breach of the GATT minimum pricing arrangements. In respect of trader-to-trader sales the ADC reported that an exhaustive search has been made of the Corporation records but no trace could be found of the certificates of authority to export skim milk powder for the period in question. Without this information the ADC could not establish that all exports were approved at or above the GATT minimum price. On the basis of this I asked my Department to investigate these matters further.
My Deparment has now examined the records held by the ADC, including records of concessional adjustments available to major recombiners. It has reported to me that whilst it is possible to infer that certain sales made by the ADC to Mexico may have been in breach of the GATT minimum price, on the basis of the available documentation this is not certain. However, there is evidence of ADC sales from April 1976 to July 1976 at the GATT agreement minimum price to Alaska Milk Industry Ltd, in Thailand, accompanied by a rebate paid to Holland Canned

Milk International, Alaska Milk's parent company. Whether this last arrangement involved a breach of the GATT agreement is open to question because the discount was paid to a third party. Nevertheless, from the ADC papers available it appears that at the time the then senior management of the ADC believed that the GATT agreement was being breached by payment of this rebate. My officers have confirmed also that the records now available within the ADC are inadequate to identify any trader-to-trader sales that may have breached the GATT agreement. A questionnaire has been sent to all licensed exporters in order to determine what records they have retained in respect of the period concerned. Responses to date indicate that it will be impossible to show whether there was any widespread breach of the GATT arrangements.
Other Matters
In my statement and the accompanying documents of 29 October 1981 I indicated that work had not been completed on some matters. These were: Guidelines for future borrowing and investment by ADI; definition and documentation of the respective duties and responsibilities of ADC and ADI accounting staff in relation to ADI transactions; a review of the desirability of ADI maintaining its Hong Kong presence; a review of the ADI Hong Kong accounting arrangements; conclusion of a management agreement with Thai Dairy Industries, and a review of employment conditions for ADI expatriate staff. There has been considerable progress on these maters. The borrowing and investment guidelines for ADI will be finalised when the Government has decided on the guidelines to apply to statutory authorities generally. Meanwhile, the situation with regard to borrowings and investments by ADI remains that no borrowings are to be undertaken without the approval of the Treasurer and myself and no investment is to be undertaken without my specific approval. The respective duties and responsibilities of ADC and ADI accounting staff in relation to ADI transactions have been clarified and are now being fully documented.
So far as maintaining a Hong Kong presence is concerned, ADI management has undertaken a study of the commercial benefits and costs and the ADI Board has now to consider this study. As a result of the review of the ADI Hong Kong accounting arrangements, a number of changes have been implemented. These include: Revised procedures for processing financial transactions; an upgraded system of internal financial control in the Hong Kong office, which was developed in

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1573

conjunction with the ADI auditors; revised procedures dealing with the frequency and nature of reporting on the utilisation of financial facilities; and new procedures, developed in consultation with ADI auditors, for verifying ADI expenses in Australia which have overcome the need for ADI auditors to qualify ADI financial statements on this aspect as in the past. The possibility of computerising ADI accounts in the Hong Kong office was examined but computerisation was found to be uneconomic. Negotiations are continuing with Thai Dairy Industries on the management agreement. The review of employment conditions for expatriate ADI staff has been completed, resulting in greater standardisation of conditions.
Conclusion
In conclusion, let me say that I believe we are approaching the end of a prolonged period of searching examination of the operations of the ADC and ADI. The Government has been determined to ensure that everything possible be done to shed light on past happenings and to establish the ground for proper operations in the future. Let me reiterate the action that has been taken. In 1979 the then Minister for Primary Industry decided that a review of the role and functions of ADI and the joint venture operations should be undertaken. The then Minister accordingly sought an inspection and audit of the accounts and records of ADI by the Commonwealth Auditor-General under section 63p of the Audit Act 1901. The Auditor-General's report disclosed deficiencies in the management and operations of ADI and its dealings with the ADC. The ADC established a special management committee to examine all aspects of the Auditor-General's report dealing with managerial and accounting practices of AD!. When the ADC reported to me on 26 October 1979 I concluded that action was immediately required to overcome deficiencies. In my statement of 29 October 1981 I provided detailed information on the action that had been taken. On some matters action was incomplete at that time and I have now indicated what further work has been done on these matters.
In September 1981 the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations reported on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian subsidiaries. The information disclosed in this report concerning a special account set up for the purposes of recieving moneys associated with rebates paid on skim milk powder sales to HOMPI was of concern. The Government was determined that as much information as possible should be obtained about this

account. I therefore requested the Auditor General to undertake a special examination of this matter. The Auditor-General's latest report is now before the House.
Finally, I want to lay to rest once and for all claims that have been made by the Opposition that the Government has attempted to cover up aspects of this issue. This is completely untrue and I want to emphasise that most forcibly. The Government has placed before the Parliament relevant documents relating to the entire issue. We have followed up on outstanding matters and have ensured the implementation of a whole range of administrative changes to improve the operations of the ADC and AD!. It has, indeed, been a long and drawn out process but this has largely been brought about by the need to ensure that all issues raised have been properly examined and fairly dealt with. Our emphasis now will be concentrated on ensuring that the reforms that have been implemented are doing the required job. If they are found to be deficient in this regard then corrective action will be taken without delay.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa)-by leave-The House is grateful to the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) for presenting the report and the documentation on Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. It is nearly a year since the last time he raised this matter. We have now gone some way down the track. I think the best that can be said is that the GATT is now out of the bag. Although the Opposition has not had time to read all elements of what has been tabled, we can still sum up by saying that key records are still missing, some deals have been done, some questions have been answered, but there are still major questions up in the air-particularly guidelines and aspects of ministerial responsibility which the Opposition has raised and which more importantly the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations has raised.
As I said, there has not been time to analyse in detail the mountain of documentation on this issue. It is a great mess. It is very obvious that there has been a lot of free-wheeling within the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries. It is historical data. Many of the records are missing. We can only make allegations about why some of the documents are missing. There have been botches and there have been mistakes. No doubt a more thorough examination of the material that the House h"s been presented with today will indicate whether the Opposition or anyone else in the Parliament will take further action to clarify the mess that is known as the Asia Dairy Industries scandal. The statement still points to substantial irregularities. The statement

1574 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

still points to substantial contradictions and differences of opinions between bodies in the Public Service and bodies out of it.
Ordinary people, dairy farmers and members of parliament want to know what the heck has gone on and what is going on. We have been given some clarification today, but today's statement does not clarify all that occurred. It has been presented in a somewhat confusing manner. At the outset I think it needs to be said that if certain documents had not fallen off a truck and there had not been assiduous questioning by Senator Walsh many of these things would never have seen the light of day.
There are still quite a few matters that have not been addressed. The statement today does not coincide with the listing of events in the Senate Committee's report. If we go back to that report and the questions raised by the Opposition, it can be seen that the issues were then quite fundamentally centering on a few individuals and the previous Minister for Primary Industry. At that stage the Opposition and the members of the Senate Committee were asking about Mr Webster, his knowledge of continuing breaches of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and his improper claim on ADI for travelling expenses~the claim being as a result of Mr Webster being called to Geneva by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) for a stay of one day which went on for a week probably because of the very GATT arrangements central to this matter, of course, the Deputy Prime Minister will not say anything about that. Questions were being asked also about Mr Webster's repayment of some $6,400~we never found out at whose request it was paid~ and the previous Minister's knowledge of Mr Webster's actions. In other words, this bore directly on the concept of ministerial responsibility.
At that time there was under question the whole matter of the breach of GATT arrangements~the whole mess of arrangements going back to Mr McCartney's time~the missing millions of dollars as a result of the rebate arrangements, the Minister's previous knowledge of this and his continuing knowledge, if not endorsement, of the continuance of the breach. Again we have the problem of ministerial responsibility. At that time we raised the question of the purge of records. Were they purged by the Department of Primary Industry? Evidence was given to the Senate Committee to that effect. Was it by the Australian Dairy Corporation and at whose request? Was it Mr Webster or somebody else in the Australian Dairy Corporation? Was it at the behest of the previous Minister? Mr Webster could

not have access to the Department of Primary Industry records, so again it is a question of ministerial responsibility.
We also raised the position ofMr Pyle, who was the only scapegoat, the only victim, in the mess of allegations. The situation involved in all less than $200. I will not go into that. That was not a case of ministerial responsibility. There was a fair amount of obfuscation by the previous Minister and allegations of cover-up. The previous Minister would not give evidence to the Senate Committee, he would not answer questions and he would not table his records. The Government at that time would not table the Auditor-General's report. It was duck-shoving, pigeon-holing and delaying a police report. That report still has not seen the light of day. We still do not know what was in that. That is why the allegations will continue about whether the situation was covered up by people responsible in this Government or by others. That has been the problem.
In the Minister's statement today he first of all addressed himself to the rebate arrangements instituted by the previous Australian Dairy Produce Board, and the Australian Dairy Corporation sales of skim milk powder to Holland Milk Products Inc. from 1974 to 1977. He said that the Auditor-General was critical of the Australian Dairy Corporation, the Australian Dairy Corporation responded and the Auditor-General said he would take no further action on the matter. It is now quite clear that the ADC was involved in the Singapore account until 3 December 1977. After that the amount in the account evaporated. We still do not know what happened to the other millions of dollars. I am not saying that the ADC got away with them but it would appear that other partners in ADI certainly did. We still do not know anything about that.
In the report presented today some of the magic dates in November again appear. On 15 November 1976 HOMPI and ADC agreed to a rebate of $25 a tonne, which rebate was to continue. It is pretty obvious that the ADC is in the clear after the end of 1977. As the report states very clearly, GATT was breached. The Auditor General's report on the top of page 23 states:
Following a meeting between Mr Webster and the Minister for Primary Industry on 9 November 1976 at which Mr Webster is understood to have outlined the basis of the $25 rebate and noted the net price charged to HOMPI had fallen below the GATT minimum of $US350 f.o.b., Messrs Webster, Norwood and Saulwick travelled to Manila to seek to vary the arrangements. No record of the discussion at the meeting of 9 November 1976 could be located.
Again, when we are getting close to finding out the truth of arrangements, discussions, agreements and instructions by the previous Minister,

Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1575

all at the critical time in November 1976, still the records are missing. That is what I said at the start; the records are still missing. GATT was breached. There is nothing in the report about whether the previous Minister sanctioned the continuing breach of GATT. That was critical to the Opposition's criticism of the Minister and it was critical to the Senate Committee's criticism of the previous Minister. Again I refer honourable members to the finding of that Committee. Paragraph 9.38 of its report states:
We have weighed up all relevant considerations, having regard to the evidence set out above, the evidence relating to Mr Sinclair's known interest in the GATT breach issue and to the Committee's own assessment of the likely course of events in all the circumstances. The Committee concludes that on the balance of probabilities, Mr Sinclair's recollection of the events was not as reliable as that of Mr Webster. In other words, it appears to the Committee that on the balance of probabilities Mr Sinclair was told of the terms of the compromise which necessarily involved a continuing breach of GATT.
We cannot get much beyond that because the key records are missing, after nearly a year of investigations. That was not the finding of a Labor Party or Opposition committee; it was an all-party committee on which the conservative parties had the balance. Let us not just say that the Opposition Party is the only party concerned about this matter. Responsible members of this Parliament in the Senate have been very concerned about this matter and the action of a statutory marketing authority. The Manager for Murray-Goulburn Co-operative Ltd has subsequently said that Mr Sinclair knew of the breach and gave the goahead. Again we cannot prove that. As I have already said, nothing is known about the police report and Mr Webster. Mr Webster's reputation has been blackened by all the allegations. I do not know why the Government cannot give him a clean bill of health. It is reasonable to ask whether a deal has been done and who has the records. Is Bill Pyle still to be the only scapegoat? We are never going to find this out.
The Minister said the GATT breach will never happen again. We are very pleased to hear that. The Auditor-General's report which the Minister tabled today was referred to the Crown Solicitor. The Crown Solicitor said that there was no prima facie evidence of any offence in Australia by any person. Given the current state of the Crown Solicitor's Office, perhaps it would be an idea to get an alternative opinion. Why not get the opinion of the Solicitor-General or outside Queen's Counsel? Although it may be stretching a longbow I think we should ask whether some of the evidence might be in a bottom drawer somewhere. As the Minister has pointed out, there is still the conflict

and substantial differences of opinion between the ADC and the Auditor-General.
The Minister then spoke about the Dairy Industry Stabilisation Fund and the ownership of funds. The Rae Committee set out in detail what its attitude was to DISF and the Minister now has clearly said that those funds should remain with the industry. I have always believed that the conclusions, recommendations or findings of that Senate Committee, whatever we call them, were rather tenuous in that regard. An analogy would be that if the Government helps an industry somehow, it can take the industry over. That is rather funny thinking. We agree with what the Government is saying here. We certainly back the Minister in the conflict between the Minister's decision on the DISF announced today and the attitude of the Rae Committee on that matter.
The Minister then addressed himself to the general guidelines question. We are disappointed. The Department of Primary Industry still has not reported to the Minister with respect to guidelines. It is nearly a year since the Department was asked to report. It is obvious that there has been a lot of freewheeling in this statutory marketing authority and the Minister has referred it to a interdepartmental committee. He has under his control 11 statutory authorities, his Department and a bureau, and we still cannot come up with a formula or report on what the guidelines are going to be. We find that very disappointing. In an earlier debate today the Minister said that I could not come up with a policy on anything. I would have thought that the Minister, with all these people backing him, could have come up by now with a simple policy on guidelines for statutory marketing authorities. The whole question of ministerial responsibility still has not been dealt with. On page 11 of the statement, when referring to the interdepartmental committee, the Minister stated:
. . . I thought that the Government should be in a position to comment on them by the time. I again reported to the Parliament. This task, however, has not yet been completed. When it is, a statement will be made by the Government.
We find that disappointing. It is nearly a year since that committee was asked to consider the matter. One would think the Government could come up with some guidelines and could set out the relationships of the Minister to the statutory marketing authorities. The Minister has reported on other breaches. But again the records are missing with respect to the breach of GATT concerning the sale of milk to Mexico. The records are not clear on the breach of GATT with respect to the Alaska Milk Industry Ltd of Thailand. It is impossible to find out about the rest of them. I

1576 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

understand that ADI is now anticipating going to China. I wonder whether we will have those guidelines set out by them. On page 13 of the statement under the heading 'Other Matters' the Minister speaks of a general review of what is happening. In the central paragraph on page 14 he stated:
The borrowing and investment guidelines for ADI will be finalised when the Government has decided on the guidelines to apply to statutory authorities generally.
We not only want these guidelines-and want them quickly-but also we want to nail the relationship between the Minister and the statutory marketing authorities. Today in an earlier debate I raised the whole question of Indomilk and the allegations floating around about the Minister's intervention. We want to know what guidelines should apply to ministerial intervention for political reasons, perhaps in this case for foreign affairs reasons, and whether he is interfering directly in the commercial responsibility of a statutory marketing authority. The second sentence in that same paragraph states:
. . . no borrowings are to be undertaken without the approval of the Treasurer and myself and no investment is to be undertaken without my specific approval.
The only question the Opposition would ask here is: What about sales also? On page 15 the Minister outlined a number of changes. We believe they are welcome and we have no comment on them. If one reads the changes in the concluding paragraphs of the statement and the historic itemisation of some of the things that the Minister has done, there is one aspect of the statement which really indicates that nothing can stop this happening again. The Chairman of ADC is still the Chairman of AD!. The same traps could still occur. While ever the guidelines are not settled and, while ever the relationship between the Minister and the statutory marketing authorities is not clearly set out, there will be confusion about this very vital area of concern and involvement by the Commonwealth Government.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (5.45)-ln supporting the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill let me state my firm belief that the resulting body, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, will be a much better body than the old Commission. It can only be more progressive and efficient and provide a better service to the

community. The decisions reflected in this legislation have been made after weighty consideration of the Dix report. Dix provided an invaluable evaluation of the Australian Broadcasting Commission and a basis for upgrading the national broadcasting network to car,ry the ABC into the future. I hope the proposed Corporation will provide for the next 50 years substantially better services than those in the last 50 years.
I praise the Government's response to Dix. It has been a difficult task because of the depth and the quality of the report. There were 273 recommendations in all. The task facing the Government was even more difficult because of a number of contentious issues, for example, corporate underwriting. But in response the Government came up with a package which is workable and sensible, with balanced decisions which will serve the ABC well. As a result the new ABC will build an organisation better suited to the changing needs of Australia. I note that the new Corporation has been given a charter, which is important for programmers, viewers, journalists and management. Now there is some type of guide and, although general in terms, it will provide scope for constructive criticism and improvement of programs. At least the charter will let the Corporation know what is expected of it by government and the viewing public.
Another important aspect of the charter is that it clearly distinguishes the Australian Broadcasting Corporation from commercial broadcasters and the very different roles the two have to play. Commercial broadcasters do not have such a charter; nor should they be expected to because they meet very different priorities and concerns. A critical comment about the charter I would give is that it provides no recognition of people who currently get no services at all and no recognition of people who get only the ABC. Whilst the charter is very good in generalised terms, it takes on more meaning in areas where it is possible to choose between more than one radio or television station. This is not the case in many areas, and I suggest that the terms of the charter could be looked at in a broad perspective to take this into account and to consider the aspirations of people in remote areas of Australia. The policy of the Corporation must reflect the needs of all its listeners and viewers--
Mr Les Johnson-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I think the honourable member who is speaking is entitled to the courtesy of a Minister's attendance in the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- That is not a point of order. It is a point of view. I

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1577

call the honourable member for the Northern Territory.
Mr TAMBLING-I was saying that the policy of the Corporation must reflect the needs of all its listeners and viewers, not just the large metropolitan audiences. The new Corporation is a significant step and more than just a name change. It brings the ABC into line with similar operations such as the British Broadcasting Corporation and will improve the corporate nature of the ABC. Although funding is still to be primarily through parliamentary appropriations, the changes will enable the ABC to develop merchandising activities with the aim of providing more funds for programs for radio and television. A more aggressive marketing stance was a key part of the Dix report and, although criticised in some quarters, the criticism was astray. Surely it is a good thing for the ABC to promote itself and to attempt to raise more money to supplement parliamentary appropriations. For this reason I agree with the lifting of the rule allowing a maximum of $7m in additional revenue. This will allow the ABC to retain increased revenues from entrepreneurial activities.
In light of the establishment of the new Corporation, I welcome all measures to make the ABC more independent. The Broadcasting and Television Act under which the ABC operated has not protected its independence. Under this Act the independence of the ABC will be more secure, to the Government's credit. An important aspect has been the release of Public Service controls. This is a sensible decision. A broadcasting organisation is clearly not like a Public Service department. In respect of overseas travel requirements for journalists and programmers it is patently different from the Public Service. The Overseas Visits Committee is inappropriate in these areas. The ABC sometimes needs to send people away quickly to cover news events overseas, and the procedures of the Committee are too lengthy and frustrating to work for the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Cutting ties with the Public Service Board enables independent and effective industrial relations capacity within the ABC. It is a move which will be applauded by staff associations and management. This consideration raises the issue of staff ceilings. The ABC has certainly suffered from these in the past, with a restricted ability of management to deploy resources quickly and flexibly. Lifting staff ceilings should improve the situation. Of course, the manpower plan which the ABC will be required to submit will provide a counterbalance. This is a protective measure against wasteful and excessive use of staff. A point

to be made about staff ceilings refers specifically to my electorate and to ABC operations in Darwin and the Northern Territory, where staff rundowns occurred after Cyclone Tracy and where the ABC has never been restored to proper and effective working levels. The removal of staff ceilings will not necessarily benefit Darwin unless a specific policy and buildup is enacted by the Corporation. I know that the ABC staff in Darwin is often hampered and harrassed because of staff constraints and work loads. Despite this, the ABC staff in the Northern Territory managed to keep up a high and professional standard of programming in areas of entertainment, sports, news and public affairs. Because of the efforts of its staff in the Northern Territory the ABC has become a respected and familiar part of everyday life. Nonetheless, the situation must be rectified immediately. The ABC office in the Northern Territory must be upgraded to proper standards appropriate to a major regional branch. The Northern Territory is a self-governing emerging entity and it is a pity that the ABC is one of the last government authorities to recognise this fact in a positive way.
One of the major changes in the the new look Corporation is the installation of the Board of Directors. It is less cumbersome than arrangements recomended by the Dix Committee. The Board will have a maximum of nine members, rather than the present 11 members. However I wish to point out a concern relating to representation for outback areas. Until the appointment of Mrs Val Mitchell of Katherine in the Northern Territory, the bush was not given enough recognition on previous boards. I point out to the Government that the possibility of the Northern Territory losing its representative would be bad for the Northern Territory and, in fact, for all areas of remote Australia. It would also be bad for the ABC, as direct representation has provided a means whereby Northern Territory people and outback Australian residents have had a real voice.
This issue also reflects my earlier concern about the inadequacies in the charter. All ABC decision making bodies must have input from the outback. It must be remembered that many of these areas rely solely on the ABC for communications. I acknowledge that the Northern Territory will have a say on the advisory bodies to be set up, but it would be a regressive step not to include the Territory in full decision-making processes. Governments should pay special concern to the needs of rural users, particularly in light of the Dix report, as one of the major deficiencies identified by the report was the imbalance between city and rural

1578 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

services. The second rural radio station was considered by Dix to have the highest priority because it offers 'the best means of redressing the imbalance of ABC radio services between metropolitan and regional services'. The Dix report argues for a second radio station instead of a second television station. When we consider the services in Sydney next to, say, those in Tennant Creek, it is easy to understand why. In Sydney we have ABC Radio 1 and 2, ABC FM, 2JJJ, ABC television, and the symphony orchestra. In Tennant Creek we have ABC radio and television only, and I must admit that Tennant Creek receives a better service than many areas that I know of.
Of course, this Government has an excellent record on communications-the remote area television service to be completed this year, the extension of the high frequency inland radio service, the self-help television service to bring television to more people in the outback-but the establishment of a second rural radio service will be a challenge to the new Corporation. This challenge will be easier to meet with its new found freedom. It is an issue which I look forward to hearing about from the Corporation in the near future. This is an issue of concern to many Territorians, who feel that their programming interests are curtailed. The most vocal representations I receive are from sports fans, who miss out on coverage when the ABC does not have exclusive or shared rights to broadcast. The merits of using broadcasting in education are largely undisputed. Dix recommends close liaison and co-operation between the ABC and the Northern Territory Department of Education for production of programs and distribution of educational material. In isolated areas broadcasting can play a vital role in the educational process. I point out again the need for the second radio service, which will allow more diverse programming to cater for the whole spectrum of community interests, and not just school or sport interests to the exclusion of all others. We could even have some broadcasting of parliamentary debates, although community opinion might differ in that regard. One education concern expressed to me is in regard to the problem of copyright on audiovisual material by the Council of Government School Organisations in the Northern Territory and teacher organisations in the Territory. I would welcome the early attention of the Government to this matter. I would certainly like to see the matter resolved soon in a way that protects the interests of producers but does not interfere with and place undue burdens on the teacher and/or the education system.

Any reference to the ABC in the Northern Territory is incomplete without mentioning Aboriginal broadcasting. The ABC plays an invaluable role in this area. The Central Australian Aboriginal Media Association in Alice Springs has an arrangement with the ABC, acting in an advisory role and providing help with equipment, programming and broadcasts. As more broadcasting opportunities open up for Aborigines, the ABC must assume a more important role in this area and it should exercise the appropriate authority. So far, ABC involvement is limited but successful and the Corporation should be ready to do more in this field.
My two final points relate to the new procedures for transmitter maintenance and complaints. The current arrangements are clumsy. The ABC is dependent on Telecom Australia and the Department of Transport and Communications for planning, installation, operation and maintenance. By transferring the maintenance function from Telecom to the ABC the process
will be streamlined. I wonder whether the whole process should not come under the one umbrella rather than the two now envisaged with the Department and the ABC. The complaints procedure should involve the particular regional manager. Programs evoke a variety of responses at the local level and the regional manager is on the spot. He is in the best position to deal with complaints quickly and efficiently. The regional manager is naturally far more aware of the nature and reasons for complaints than an office many thousands of miles away. In conclusion, I restate my praises for the Dix Committee members for producing a report which provides for the revitalisation of the ABC. I should also like to reiterate praise for the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) and his predecessor, the present Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair), who conducted a thorough scrutiny of the report and have come up with a package which substantially improves the ABC and will carry it through the next 50 years.
Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (8.0)-in reply-I shall reply comparatively very briefly to the contributions made by the honourable members who participated in this debate. At the outset I thank those honourable members who contributed to the debate for their thoughtful contributions. I shall turn to some of the specific matters raised primarily by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). I will be able to make my remarks briefer than otherwise by virtue of the fact that the Opposition proposes to move

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1579

amendments, and in the Committee stage, where appropriate, I will speak in more detail with respect to the various amendments that have been proposed.

Mr Deputy Speaker, the first of the matters

that the honourable member for Fremantle raised

was with respect to appointments to the Board of

Directors of the Australian Broadcasting Corpor-

ation. You will recall that the honourable

member indicated that the Opposition's view was,

briefly, that there should be a joint committee of

the Parliament and that that joint committee

should, to use the honourable member's words,

vet proposed appointments to the Board. I think

on another occasion he said that the committee

should interview proposed appointees. I shall

make several points in reply to that suggestion

that in substance instead of the Government mak-

ing the appointments the Minister should go to a

joint committee of the Parliament, that he should

submit his nominees to the committee, that the

committee should consider those nominees and

that, as the words of the proposed amendment

read, 'in making any recommendation to each

house of Parliament, the Joint Committee of the

Parliament

. shall consider only a nomi-

nee or nominees notified to the Committee by the

Minister'. So the alternative to the Government's

proposal is that there should be a joint committee

that should vet and interview proposed ap-

pointees and that in effect recommendations

should not be made to the Governor-General for

appointment other than those which have been

approved by the proposed joint committee. The

Government rejects that suggestion and when the

amendment is moved it will reject that

amendment.

Let me say six things in reply to the suggestion. In the first place appointments must be made by the Government. The responsibility is the Government's to make appointments to this body and to other bodies and the Government is accountable to the people through the Parliament for the decisions that it makes with respect to appointments to the Board of Directors. It is often overlooked, it seems, particularly these days that a democratically elected government has responsibility for and is responsible to the people through the Parliament, not through some committee which sets itself up as a kangaroo court to pass judgment on proposed appointees. The Parliament is responsible to the people and the Government is responsible to the people through the Parliament. So it is the Government's job, and it will of course pay the bill if its behaviour is notorious, if its conduct is such that the people decide it should be rejected and voted out of office.

That is the first thing that should be said in reply-that it is the responsibility of government which the Government cannot, and in the case of this Government, will not abrogate or abandon.
Secondly, it is in my submission very strange logic to say that the aim of the exercise by the Opposition is to achieve a situation in which there are non-political appointments to the Board of Directors, and to say that the way that can be achieved is by a parliamentary committee. How can we arrive at non-political appointments to the Board or any other body by means of a parliamentary committee which must, by virtue of its very nature and its composition, be political? Members of parliament usually are members of political parties and the representation on the parliamentary committee will be, as it almost always is, in proportion to the representation of the parties in the appropriate House of the parliament. So, the committee itself will be political and those who pass through its scrutiny and judgment would have passed a political test. So, it is strange logic to say that this proposal would result in having non-political appointees to the Board. Indeed, as I hope I will be able to illustrate later, the procedure of endorsing or vetting proposed appointments to the Board by means of a parliamentary committee would in fact guarantee that the people who ended up as members of the Board were in fact politically approved and endorsed by the political judgment of the political parties represented in this Parliament and that, I would have thought, is a result which all honourable members should, and I am sure all members of the community would, reject.
Thirdly, it would seem that we would have to obtain agreement amongst the members of the parliamentary committee before the committee put its stamp of approval on proposed appointees. The result of that would simply be that we would get the lowest common denominator. If we are going to have proposed appointees to the Board of the Corporation who are able to run the gauntlet successfully through the intricacies of this parliamentary committee, we would end up with those to whom no real objection was raised by any of the political parties. They would all in effect be appointees who had the approval of the politicians on the committee and that can only result in obtaining, as I have said, the lowest common denominator-indeed, probably the less rugged, less adventurous and less independent sorts of people who are the opposite of the sorts of people I would hope we would want to have on the Board of the Corporation.
Fourthly, as I said before, to use the procedure which the Opposition has suggested would in fact

1580 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

guarantee that we had political appointments to the Board of the Corporation. If we adopted this procedure to get the proposed appointees through the committee, we would end up with a certain proportion of people who were supported by the Liberal Party representatives on the committee, a certain proportion who were supported by the National Country Party representatives, a certain proportion who were supported by and received an endorsement from the Australian Labor Party representatives and a certain proportion supported by the Australian Democrats and other parties which might have representatives on the committee. That is the only way we would be able to resolve an argument about proposed appointees. The Government would say to the Labor Party: 'Look, if you will let Mr Smith through, we will let Mrs Bloggs through'. It would be known that one appointee was in fact supported and endorsed by one political party and that another appointee was endorsed and supported by another political party. That would institutionalise a system of obtaining political appointees to the Board of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. That, I hope, would be anathema.
Fifthly, this proposal of vetting-or interviewing as the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) said-is one that would simply deter good people from being prepared to be appointed to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Board. Who in his or her right senses would be prepared to go before a committee on which the honourable member for Fremantle and Senator Walsh were representing the Labor Party to be interviewed-and I use that word rather euphemistically? I can just imagine some of the inquiries that would be made into the people who were being--
Mr Dawkins-I am capable of being very polite.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I have not seen much evidence of it. I do not know whether the people who were prepared to be appointees to the Board would be very happy about the prospect of being cross examined by Senator Walsh as to what was in last year's taxation return, what their Aunt Maude might have done with her inheritance, or any of the other matters that seem to preoccupy Senator Walsh to the exclusion of almost all national issues. I would have thought that would deter any sensible person from giving five minutes consideration to becoming a member of the Board of the ABC. I would have thought that no sensible person would agree to such a humiliating and denigrating experience. To think that it is the role

of the Parliament or a committee of the Parliament to sit in judgment of people and to say: 'We, as a committee of the Parliament, think you are or are not good enough to serve as a member of the Board of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation', is an obscene suggestion and should be rejected.
Finally, I repeat what I have already said to Senator Button. If the Australian Labor Party wants to suggest people for me, or my successors in office in the future, to consider as possible appointees, it is simply a matter of telling me who they are and serious consideration will be given to them.
I turn now to the second matter to which the honourable member for Fremantle and his colleague the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) addressed themselves, the issue of the proposed office of Commissioner for Complaints to deal with complaints against programs on the ABC. It was said that this proposal was objectionable; that the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission had indicated that the Commonwealth Ombudsman had power to deal with the complaints; and that rather than making the Commissioner for Complaints a political monitor on the ABC, that function should be performed by the Board of the ABC. We reject the substance and the detail of those submissions.
In reply we say that in the first place we believe that there is a case made out and a need for a commissioner for complaints or some similar structure to investigate complaints of this nature. The aim of such a body is to protect the citizen. Often citizens are offended by programs about themselves or about matters with which they are concerned which are programmed on the ABC, the commercial radio and television stations and presumably the public broadcasting stations as well. The citizen quite often says: 'I have been unfairly dealt with'; or 'That program was biased against my interests'; or 'That program was otherwise objectionable'. Those people may also say that there was a gross invasion of their privacy when television cameramen burst into their house and started filming or did the same thing in their office. They may say: 'That was an invasion of my privacy and I demand that that should be properly investigated'. They are quite legitimate complaints. Our view is that the citizen has a right to have those complaints examined properly by an independent body. The way to do it is to have them investigated by a commissioner for complaints and for that commissioner to report to us on the conduct of the investigation of those complaints.

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1581

But it is a civil liberties matter, not a restriction on the ABC. It is an attempt to protect the interests of the citizen and to have the complaints of the citizen investigated properly. People are entitled to have such complaints investigated fairly and independently to ensure that the broadcasting system, whether it is a commercial or public system, or, in the case with which we are dealing tonight, the national system, is fair, that it is not biased or prejudiced and that there is no invasion of the privacy of the individual citizen in the course of a program being made.
I say very briefly, because I do not want to take too long at this stage, that the arbitrator should be independent. We believe that the Commissioner for Complaints can and wiJ1 be independent. That is an important feature. Further, we say that, although the Ombudsman performs a very valuable role in his activities, he has not in every respect the proper machinery for investigating complaints of this sort. The Ombudsman is not necessarily in every respect a completely satisfactory method of investigating complaints. His basic role under the Ombudsman Act is to investigate administrative decisions. It is not a role to investigate programming matters, the invasion of privacy or the other sort., of matters which are set out in the Bill as proper grounds for complaint which wiJJ be investigated by the Commissioner for Complaints.
I hasten to add that the powers of the Ombudsman will not be affected or limited by this statute. The legislation that we are dealing with preserves the powers of the Ombudsman and does not affect them in any way. I might add-this is an important point to make-that if it is suggested that a burden is now being imposed on the ABC which is greater than the burden on commercial radio and television stations, we reject that suggestion. There is indeed a very heavy burden and very heavy onus on the commercial radio and television stations. I refer the House to section 88 of the Broadcasting and Television Act and also to section 132 of that Act. Section 88 of the Act, without reading it all out, provides:
. . . the Tribunal may . . . suspend or revoke a licence where . . . the licensee has failed to comply with the undertaking given under~--
It then refers to certain sub-sections, and continues:
the Tribunal is satisfied that the licensee-
(a) is no longer a fit and proper person . . . . or . . . . the Tribunal is satisfied that a condition of the license has not been complied with.
So in fact the licence held by a commercial broadcaster may be suspended or revoked if any of those circumstances exist. In particular, I refer to

the fact that that can happen if the licensee is no longer a fit and proper person. That is a very stringent and very tough obligation and duty imposed upon commercial licensees which in fact is not imposed upon the Australian Broadcasting Commission or the future Corporation. With respect to section 132 there is a provision there for offences being committed by licensees if there is a failure to comply with, for example, conditions of a licence which has been granted. Of course, the very heavy consequence of serious breaches of the Broadcasting and Television Act for commercial broadcasters is that the licensee may lose his licence.
The ABC does not have a licence and, no matter what transgressions might be committed in the course of preparing programs, it cannot be stopped from broadcasting. A commercial licensee can. Fully fledged hearings are conducted into the renewal oflicences for commercial broadcasters and telecasters. Again, that sort of provision is not imposed upon the ABC. So in totality one can say very fairly that this is a reasonable obligation to impose on the national broadcaster. All that it does is to ask the national broadcaster not to engage in that sort of conduct which would give rise to a complaint; that is, not to be biased, not to invade people's privacy, not to be unfair and not to do those other things which give rise to a complaint under the Act. If it does happen, there is a right of complaint by those who have an interest in the matter; not just anyone who objects to a program, but anyone who has an interest in the matter.
I might also add, as one of the very last points that 1 wish to make, that the Commissioner for Complaints is not obliged to investigate a complaint which is frivolous or vexatious. So this provision is a proper balance between preserving the independence of the Australian Broadcasting Commission and protecting the rights of the individual citizen, which happens to be important to some people. Some people believe it is important to take the time of the Parliament to address a few remarks on such an important subject.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recomending appropriation announced.
In Committee
Clauses 1to 30-by leave-taken together.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.21)-1 have an amendment to clause 12. 1move:
(I) Clause 12, page 8, after sub-section (2) insert the following sub-clauses:

1582 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

"(2A) In appointing non-executive Directors, the Governor-General shall have regard to any recommendation to each House of Parliament, relating to any prospective appointee, made by a Joint Committee of the Parliament constituted as the Parliament may determine.
"(28) The Minister shall submit to the Joint Committee of the Parliament a nominee or nominees for consideration by that Committee.
"(2C) In making any recommendation to each House of Parliament, the Joint Committee of the Parliament referred to in sub-section (2A) shall consider only a nominee or nominees notified to the Committee by the Minister."
I foreshadowed this amendment in the debate on the motion for the second reading. I will not be repetitive. However, I think it is important to mention a couple of important matters. The proposal put forward in the amendment involves a parliamentary committee comprising all parties within the Parliament being involved in the scrutiny of appointments to the Board of the proposed Australian Broadcasting Corporation. The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) spent much of his reply to the second reading debate disparaging this proposal. He commenced by saying that it remains his firm conviction that this Government and any government ought to retain the duty and the responsibility for making appointments to these sorts of bodies. We would not disagree with him in any way. Of course, that remains the position and that will always be the position as far as we are concerned. I agree very enthusiastically with the Minister when he says that governments have to take responsibility for these sorts of actions. I do not want to press the Minister too far in relation to the current membership of the current Australian Broadcasting Commission and, in particular, in relation to one member of the Commission whose conduct the Minister presumably condones and indeed whose future the Minister wants to protect.
Leaving that aside, the point is that the Minister lacks some imagination in relation to this question. I accept that he is a vast improvement on his immediate predecessor as Minister for Communications. I think it has been a very refreshing change to have him around at the time this legislation is being both drawn up and debated. But I would have thought that this Minister would have had a bit more imagination when it came to this matter. We are not proposing for a moment that this Government, or any future government, should abrogate the responsibility for making the appointments in the final analysis. The Parliament and the parliamentary committees cannot make the recommendations directly to the Governor-General or to the Governor-Generalin-Council. That remains the function of the Minister. Of course it will always be the right of any

Minister for Communications to make his own recommendations if he likes.
The point is, however, that unless we make some move towards some form of formalised bipartisanship in relation to appointments to the Board we will continue to have this idiocy of one government appointing its mates and the successive government appointing its mates. There is nothing more ridiculous. The Minister can point to the fact that, under Labor's proposal, it may indeed degenerate into a process whereby one party puts up its nominee in return for the other party having the right to put up its nominee but that would be a degeneration of the proposal. Even if it happened, it would be no worse than the situation we have now, in which governments are completely free and unfettered to stack the Commission with their own mates. At least in that degenerate prospect we would still have some semblance of balance, inadequate as it would obviously be, but at least it would be a slight advance on what we have at the moment.
Labor takes a much more optimistic view of this proposal. What we contemplate is that if this procedure were to exist and there were a requirement that ministerial recommendations, or those of anyone else, had to go before an all-party committee, the Minister would take very much more care in proposing his recommendations. He would not want people he thought appropriate for appointment to the Board to run the gauntlet, as he says, of fierce interrogation by the committee. I believe that that sort of fierce interrogation would not be necessary in order to satisfy the requirements that we propose. It would be up to the committee to determine whether it would sit in public or private, whether it would interview candidates in person or possibly just contemplate a list of candidates, with details, and make a determination on that basis.
What I put to the Minister is that under the suggested procedure, if a Minister knows that any nominee that he or she proposes will have to go before an all-party committee, and at least be the subject of comment by it-if not approved or rejected by it-then I believe the Minister would take very much more care in exercising his duty of proposing candidates for membership of the Board. What the Minister would do, in fact, under the circumstances, would be to ensure that his candidates would be not only of high calibre but also broadly acceptable to a cross-section of the community.
It is really facile of the Minister to say that the only people whom the Australian Labor Party would accept would be Labor Party members. I

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1583

suspect that it is equally ridiculous to say that the only candidates that the Liberal Party would accept would be Liberal Party membersnotwithstanding, I repeat, some recent appointments. I am sure that both parties would be prepared to accept people of high calibre who were perhaps not associated with any political party but were respected by all as being appropriate for membership of the Board of the reconstituted Australian Broadcasting Commission. All we are saying is that the ABC, more than any other government body, ought to comprise people who enjoy respect across party political lines, enjoy the respect of the community in general and are able to ensure that the ABC, in carrying out its function as the major provider of information to the community, the major vehicle for comment and criticism of society or whatever else, should be broadly acceptable to the community in general. That is really all that we are saying.
Frankly, I am very disappointed that the Minister takes the view that he does because I know he believes that some recent appointments to the ABC have been inappropriate. I also know that at least one of his recent predecessors, a member of his own party, had a similar view. I know, for instance, that one of his predecessors proposed persons who should have been appointed to the Commission but who, for a variety of reasons, were not. I suspect that one of the very important reasons for that was that someone close to the position of Prime Minister took the view that in order to be absolutely safe about these appointments he would accept only those people who he knew shared his peculiar view of the world and his peculiar political instincts. I think that is something we ought to be trying to get away from.
We are proposing, in a spirit of immense cooperation with the Government-co-operation which I think would persist if this sort of arrangement were established-to embark on a process whereby the ABC did become a politically neutral organisation. In using the words 'politically neutral', I do not mean politically hopeless, spineless or somewhat like a marshmallow and lacking in any character at all, but rather a body of great respect, a body of great influence in the community and a body which would enjoy the support of the whole community. That is what we are aiming for. I would be very surprised if the current Minister did not also take that view. It may be that he thinks that for so long as he is Minister for Communications he is able to guarantee that the appointments that will be made are of a suitable character and calibre. He has to bear in mind that he may not always be the Minister for Communications. There may, dare I say it, be members even

from his own party who lack the sort of commitment for the neutrality and notions of excellence as far as the ABC is concerned and that is the danger we are keeping in mind.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Drummond)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MAHER (Lowe) (8.31)-This evening I wish to make a number of observations on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill and, in particular, on clause 30 which is the only part of the Bill relating to children's television programs. It is my opinion, whilst the Opposition is supporting this clause, that the clause is really a sop to certain commercial television interests. Honourable members will be aware of the controversy which has raged for some years in relation to children's television and the influence television can have on young Australians, young children from the age of three upwards.
I noticed in the report of the Dix Committee of Review on the Australian Broadcasting Commission that there was an acknowledgment of the many submissions made to that Committee in relation to children's television. The Dix Committee highlighted the fact that a third of the Australian television audience comprises young people under the age of 15 years. In fact, 27 per cent of the population is in the 14-year old age group and about a third is under 15 years. I draw the attention of the House to this important segment of the population. I will comment briefly on the responsibilities of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in relation to our young people and in relation to future Australians. I do this with great affection for the Corporation in a year when it has brought a wonderful experience to the Australian population in the series Brideshead Revisited. That is not the purpose of my comment tonight. My comments tonight are in relation to television for young people.
This week my 8-year old daughter asked my wife: 'What is the Costigan ieport?' If Government members feel I am going to launch into a debate on the bottom-of-the-harbour tax schemes during the Committee stage of the Bill relating to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, they need have no fears about that. My 8-year old daughter learned about the Costigan report from the ABC program Nationwide. Children in these age groups in primary school gain much of their education and obtain much information from Geraldine Doogue and outstanding ABC commentators and reporters on programs such as Nationwide.

1584 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

One of the complaints that I have received as a Federal member, and which I received as a State member, is that from time to time the ABC runs late at night programs suitable for children. Last year a program suitable for young girls, a ballet called the Nutcracker, was run at IO o'clock on a Sunday evening. A problem now arises in regard to people who wish to go to the trouble of complaining because the Bill before the House contains a very convoluted procedure for complaints. This will be dealt with later in the Committee stage, but that is the complaint I am getting-that from time to time programs designed for children are shown late at night. They are too late for families as by IO o'clock on a Sunday night children who have to get up for school the next day are well and truly in bed.
However, the ABC does make a very concerted effort to produce first-class programs for children. We all know there has been a controversy for years about a program known as Sesame Street, which is shown daily for pre-school children. I was delighted to note that my good friend the Commissioner for Community Relations made submissions to the Dix committee of review recommending this program. Despite its obvious American bias and its creation for American pupils and pre-schoolers, he and his researchers submitted to the Dix committee that Sesame Street had much merit and was extremely useful in the Australian situation. What I do believe is reprehensible is that cartoons designed for chil, dren, aimed at the young audience, are shown on our commercial networks from 6 a.m. The ABC is to be congratulated because it commences broadcasting to children at 8 a.m. It broadcasts from 8 o'clock until 9 o'clock and switches off until 9.30 a.m. or later. It is of concern to me that, despite the fact that there is such concern in the community about children's television programs, only one section in the legislation establishing the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and remoulding the ABC as we know it touches on this important area of broadcasting.
For some time there has been controversy over the registration and assessment of programs for children. Clause 30 allows the Corporation, if the Board thinks fit, to submit to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal for classification by that Tribunal television programs for children intended for public reception during hours specified by the Tribunal as hours for the presentation of such programs. These hours include 4 p.m. until 5 p.m. There has been much criticism of some commercial stations for showing between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. programs which are not classified

by the Tribunal. It is my belief that the time during which children watch television is not just 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. but 4 p.m. until 7 p.m. Certainly they watch from 4 o'clock to 6 o'clock. I have noticed that one commercial station in Sydney shows a program known as the Young Doctors at 5 p.m. This program is hardly attuned to children between four and eight years old. Yet this commercial station believes that it is appropriate to show this program at 5 p.m., at a time when much of the audience must be young children and preschool children.
I trust that the new Corporation and the Board of the Corporation will most sincerely examine
this whole question of children's television. I know that programs beamed in Sydney, such as All Creatures Great and Small and some other British series, have had large audiences of children and young people. I know how much appreciated and well received these programs were. Without further ado, I am pleased that I had a few minutes in the Committee stage to touch on the importance of children's television programs. I know the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) will convey my comments to the Board when it is established.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (8.39)-1 wish to make a few comments on clause 12 of the Bill and the amendment moved by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). As I said in my speech during the second reading debate, I cannot agree with the legislation. I believe we must come forward with something better than what amounts to a rehash of the system operating for the last 50 years, which has not served the Australian Broadcasting Commission as well as it should have. As the honourable member for Fremantle pointed out, we know of cases-these are not connected with the present Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown)-when the Minister responsible for this area has put forward to the Opposition the names of several people who have been quite reasonable. They have not been people who were in any way connected with the Labor movement. In fact, probably the reverse was true. They seemed to be people who could have added something to our broadcasting system. However, after the Government has put forward those names and had them okayed by the shadow Minister, somehow or other, in the course of government, their appointments have been knocked on the head. Whether this has been done by a Prime Minister, the Cabinet or whoever, it amounts to the Government having changed its mind and appointing others who it thought would hold up its line of thinking. That is not what the broadcasting and television area is about. It is not

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1585

an area for political appointments. It never has been, although all sorts of governments have made political appointments in this area in the past.
If we are to progress, to make this legislation real and operative and allow the ABC to move forward in the future, we need to take steps to take political appointments out of the realms of government. The amendment put forward by the honourable member for Fremantle proposes to establish ajoint committee of the Parliament constituted as the Parliament may determine. The Government obviously has control of the Parliament. Even though my thoughts are slightly different, as I mentioned in my speech during the second reading debate, and I am not too concerned about the finer details, I imagine that not many votes would be taken and that there would be a consensus. Good and reasonable people would be chosen who could contribute something to the industry. If there were any carry-on from members and if people started to play up it is fairly obvious that we could move back, knock the whole section out of the Act and go back to what the Government proposes. If people wanted to grandstand and carryon the committee would be unworkable. However, I think the amendment is worth a try. As I said, we must try to move to something better. I do not think that the last 50 years have served the ABC at all.
I came from the private enterprise part of the industry and never worked for the ABC. My views on the ABC can probably be judged from my comments. It needs to be taken towards the private area to make it work and compete. It does not matter so much what programs it relays at 7 o'clock or any other time but it must get out and do entrepreneurial work to jolt many commercial stations, which feel that there is no competition from the government sector. If we have cronies or stooges on the Board of the new Australian Broadcasting Corporation this will never happen. I have forgotten who said that business people should be appointed to the Board. It may have been the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull). I spoke earlier of the people who were recommended to the Labor Opposition some years ago. If my memory serves me correctly, they were all business people who were very highly thought of.
The amendments moved by the honourable member for Fremantleare very worthwhile. I am not convinced that the present legislation will work properly. The second part of the amendment, which seeks to insert new sub-clause (2B), states:

The Minister shall submit to the Joint Committee of the Parliament a nominee or nominees.
It is not the parliamentary committee that is calling for nominations. It is the Minister who will submit those nominations, and the Minister alone. Proposed sub-clause (2C) states:
. . . shall consider only a nominee or nominees notified to the Committee by the Minister.
That is fairly important. I have tried to put myself in the place of the Minister and think what my position would be. I do not really think that this takes it out of the Minister's hands or the Government's hands to the extent that the Government is making out. So, for all those reasons, I support the amendments.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (8.46)-First, I address a few brief remarks with respect to the first amendment on which the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) and the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) have spoken. In the second reading debate I explained in substance why the Government could not accept any such amendment. At this stage all that I should like to do would be simply to say that the Australian Broadcasting Commission Committee of Review chaired by Mr Dix examined the whole question very thoroughly. I should like to read two short extracts from its report. Those extracts are on page 88, the first being at paragraph 6.20 and the second being at paragraph 6.22. I think that what the Dix Committee said speaks for itself and sums up the whole argument and, indeed, supports the Government's position. The first extract reads:
We have closely examined all the possibilities put to us for selection of Commissioners and have reluctantly concluded that none would be a significant improvement over the current system. Parliamentary committees, despite some claims to the contrary, are controlled by the government of the day and the government view will prevail in the event of any disagreement.
The second comment that the Dix Committee made was this:
We are doubtful that any real consensus could be reached. Inevitably the Governments view would prevail, and in the process nominees would be subjected to a degree of public scrutiny which would be at best, unnerving, and at worst,
intrusive~especially~~
and this is a significant remark-
in the event of the nomination's being rejected.
Amendment negatived.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 31 to 41-by leave-taken together.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.48)-1 move:
Clause 31, page 17, line 39, at the end of paragraph (c) add "but in connection with the broadcasting or televising of such

1586 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

a program no announcement in the nature of commercial sponsorship shall be made,",
I shall not delay the House, The amendment seeks to make it absolutely clear that the Bill before us does not include a power, explicitly or implicitly, to allow for corporate sponsorship on the Australian Broadcasting Commission, We understand that the Government does not intend to allow for corporate sponsorship, but on our reading of the Bill, in relation not only to clause 31 but also a couple of preceding clauses, it appears to us that it may just be possible for some form of corporate sponsorship to be possible. The Minister has indicated to me across the table that he is prepared to examine this question-that is, that the Government does not have any intention to allow back-door corporate sponsorship. He is prepared to look at this amendment. On that basis, whilst the amendment has been formally moved, I do not intend to persist with it but to allow the Minister to consider the matter further and perhaps we might be able to have it accepted in another place.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (8.50)-1 just reiterate virtually for a few seconds what the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) said. It is not our intention to jiggle the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill for any reason. On reading the Bill again it seems as if there could have been areas in the back door, shall we say, whereby corporate sponsorship could have occurred if it were really intended. To really make that point iron-clad in the Bill and to assure everyone concerned, it is only a matter of the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) stating that this is not the intention. To satisfy that end the Opposition has moved this amendment. It makes iron-clad what the Minister has already stated in various responses to the report of the Dix Committee of Reiview into the Australian Broadcasting Commission. If the Government is genuine in that response-I am sure it is and I am sure the Minister for Communications who is at the table is-the Minister may take heed and have regard to the amendment we have moved in this respect, either in this House or in the other place at some stage.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (8.51)-What the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) said was correct. It is simply a matter of my discussing the issue with the Parliamentary Counsel to ensure that we are not introducing any unnecessary duplication which, in to to, might lead to some uncertainty in the Bill.
Amendment negatived.
Clauses agreed to.

Clause 42 (Determination of appeals).
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.52)-by leave I move:
(3) Clause 42, page 26, lines 3 and 4, omit 'a Promotions Appeal Board shall inquire into the claims of each party to the appeal proceedings', substitute 'a Promotions Appeal Board shall make full inquiry into the claims of each party to the appeal proceedings',
(4) Clause 42, page 26,lines 5-40, omit sub-clause (2), substitute the following sub-clause:
'(2) In making inquiries into the claims of each party to the appeal proceedings, the Promotions Appeal Board: (a) may follow such procedures as it thinks fit; and (b) is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself in such manner as it thinks fit. '.
(5) Clause 42, pages 26 and 27, omit sub-clauses (3) and (4),
I do not wish to take up the time of the chamber in relation to this matter. The clause deals with the matter of appeals against promotions within the ABC. It will be clear, now that it is proposed that the ABC be excluded from the provisions of the Public Service Act, that the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill has to accommodate provisions for appeals against promotions in the same way as the Public Service Act now does. All that the Opposition is attempting to do on this occasion is to include in relation to this matter the same proposals which we put forward when the Public Service Bill itself was being considered. It is a matter of the Opposition maintaining a consistent view in relation to procedures under the Promotions Appeal Board provisions. I do not intend to take that matter any further.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (8.53)-The Government is unable to accept these amendments really for the reason that the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) has advanced-namely, that they are, of course, similar to, if not the same as, those relating to the Public Service. Our position on that likewise has been made clear.
Amendments negatived.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 43 to 45-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 46 and 47-by leave-taken together.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.54)-1 simply say that the Opposition is opposed to clauses 46 and 47. This is not the time, I think, for going into a long-winded debate about industrial relations. What these two proposals relate to are the nowork no-pay provisions which the Government has enthusiastically included in as much legislation as it possibly can dealing with the employment of Commonwealth public servants and

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1587

others. Also, again because it is proposed that the Australian Broadcasting Commission should be taken out of the jurisdiction of the Public Service Act, the Government has included no work as directed-no pay provisions in this Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill. For the reasons that have been amply expounded before by my colleagues, the Opposition is opposed to clauses 46 and 47.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (8.56)-As the Government has already stated in the Parliament and elsewhere, it believes that provisions known popularly, and indeed in the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill, as 'no work as directed-no pay provisions' should exist. Accordingly, we believe those provisions should be included in this Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill also.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 48 to 78-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 79 to 102 (Part VIII)-by leavetaken together.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.57)-1 move:
(8) Pages 54-63, omit Part VIII (comprising clauses 79 to \02).
Part VIII of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill is entitled 'Investigation of Complaints about Programs'. This is the matter which the Opposition finds most obnoxious about the Bill. What the Government is proposing in this Part is that an Office of the Commissioner for Complaints should be established to deal with complaints levelled at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) has indicated that this will not in any way affect the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth Ombudsman. That really does not clarify the situation very much because currently a huge brawl is raging between the Ombudsman and the Australian Broadcasting Commission about where the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman starts and stops in relation to the ABC.
The Ombudsman is perfectly clear in his mind that his role is a very limited one in relation to the ABC and deals with questions involving administrative matters which might affect or prejudice the interest of individual people. But the ABCthrough the Chairman and, indeed, the former Chairman-has been unable to agree with the Ombudsman that he does have jurisdiction in that area. So, it really is quite unhelpful for the Minister to say that the existing powers of the Ombudsman will persist. Quite frankly I do not know what the existing powers of the Ombudsman are

and I am sure that the Minister does not know either. Probably that matter will be resolved only when it becomes the subject of some form of litigation.
What we are arguing is that the proposals of the Government are really quite inappropriate in terms of trying to resolve that matter. It ought to be made clear that there are really two categories of complaints that can be made about the ABC. I acknowledge that the Minister responded to those points in his reply to the second reading debate, but I think it is important to go over them again. The point is that there are matters which may involve, for example, as the Minister said, an intrusion into the privacy of an individual. The Minister gave a very graphic illustration of that. He said that an ABC representative might storm into somebody's house or office and begin photographing or filming somebody against that person's wishes; or, alternatively, the ABC might misrepresent the views of an individual and then decline to give that individual an opportunity to reply.
The Ombudsman would maintain that that is not a matter of programming but a matter of defective administration of the organisation which does impinge on the interests of an individual. He would maintain therefore that he has a right, and indeed a duty, to investigate any complaints he might receive in relation to those matters. If we have a Commissioner for Complaints will it be the Commissioner for Complaints or the Ombudsman-with what the Minister understands is the existing and continuing powers of the Ombudsman-who will investigate complaints in grey areas of that sort? It is not clear from what the Minister said. We certainly do not want a situation where both of them are involved in investigating the same kind of complaint. Yet we would strongly argue that the Ombudsman is in a much better position to investigate that sort of complaint.
If the Government's intention is to try to resolve this matter by giving the proposed Commissioner for Complaints very wide powers in order that he can investigate all complaints, we think this is opening up an area which is extremely dangerous and potentially very sinister. I will read from clause 79 of the Bill to show what a complaint relates to. Clause 79 states:
"complaint", in relation to a broadcasting or television program of the Corporation, means a complaint as to anyone or more of the following:
(a) that the program was inaccurate, unfair or biased.
Who is to say that a matter was inaccurate, unfair or biased? Obviously that is a matter for individual assessment. Two people could have entirely

1588 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

different views as to whether a program was unfair or biased. The clause further states:
(b) that an unwarranted intrusion into the privacy of a person took place in the course of obtaining matter for inclusion in the program (whether or not the matter so obtained was included in the program);
That is the sort of matter which the Ombudsman would view as being his responsibility. The third category in the clause is this:
(c) that the program constituted an unwarranted intrusion into the privacy of a person;
Again the existing Ombudsman would see that as being his responsibility. The fourth part of the clause states:
(d) that the program was otherwise offensive . . .
I do not know how we could draw the clause more broadly than that. The program was offensive to whom? What is offensive to one person might be totally appealing to another. It seems to us that the Government is giving to the proposed Commissioner for Complaints Stalinist powers which will allow him to start examining people's minds and motives and really to make the sort of value judgments which we think are quite inappropriate in a democracy and certainly in relation to a public broadcasting organisation.
The Minister has said that in relation to the matter of complaints there is need for some consistency between the ABC and the commercial broadcasting operators. He has rightly indicated that in relation to the commercial broadcasters there is the possibility that complaints can be taken to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. These complaints can be heard by the Tribunal and, indeed, the ultimate sanction can be applied by the Tribunal-it can remove the licence of a broadcaster. I interjected during the Minister's speech but the Minister did not respond. I asked how many broadcasters had in fact been rebuked in this way. Of course, the answer is none. There has not been an instance where the Tribunal or its predecessor has taken the view that an offence was so grave that the ultimate and, indeed, the only sanction should be applied in relation to a commercial broadcaster.
Mr N. A. Browo-They still inquire.
Mr DAWKINS-The Minister is absolutely right, the Tribunal does still inquire, yes.
Mr N. A. Browo-They censure them.
Mr DAWKINS-Yes, that is terrific. In terms of the sanctions that can be applied there is only the threat of taking the broadcaster off the air. That is an action which, I suspect, the Tribunal would be unlikely to take except in the most grave circumstances or in the event of repeated defiance of orders or rebukes given by the Tribunal. I do

not think there is any consistency in what the Minister is saying about the position of the Commissioner for Complaints, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal in relation to the commercial broadcasters. We are immensely concerned that inclusion of this proposal in the existing Bill will give to some individual or group of individuals quite horrendous powers in relation to the examination of persons who have contributed to the reason for the complaint. When the complaint can be so broadly based, in that the program is simply considered by an individual to be otherwise offensive, this seems to be an enormously wide and very threatening sort of proposition. If the Minister is concerned about the invasion of privacy-I believe he is honest when he says that he is concerned about it-why is he not prepared to accept the Commonwealth Ombudsman's statement in his 1980 report when he said:
I cannot review programmiIlg decisions made by the Commission in the exercise of its responsibilities as the national broadcaster unless there is some element of defective administration going beyond the merits of a programming decision, as for example, where there is complaint that there was a selection of material intended to prejudice the legitimate interests of some person.
It seems to me that the Ombudsman has a clear view of his rights and his duties in relation to this matter.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarmao)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (9.7)-1 support the remarks of the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). As I mentioned in my speech during the second reading debate the whole clause entitled 'Commissioner for Complaints' really does conjure up the idea of a little man running around firing bullets at everyone who comes within his sights on a whole range of issues and on any type of complaint. The honourable member for Bowman (Mr lull), who is a Government supporter, expressed concern. He did not put it in these terms but I did earlier and I will say it again: We could have a whole range of lunatic organisations and groups which could well keep the Commissioner for Complaints, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the taxpayers' money very busy because the structure will be there under the setup of this legislation.
As the honourable member for Fremantle has said-I agree with him-there needs to be an avenue for complaint but I think that avenue already exists. If the Commonwealth Ombudsman needs some more technical assistance in regard to the Commonwealth Act which relates to

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1589

him, we should look at amending that Act. I do not think that would be a complicated job. If the Commonwealth Ombudsman needs assistance, so be it. I think this really comes within his realm. Also, of course, the greater volume of complaints in the programming area are most likely to go to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation itself. If the Corporation is to be compared to a private enterprise setup, the Board itself, if it is a responsible Board, should look at and respond to any complaints that come into the organisation. That is why we have just passed a Bill which set up the Board of seven people and outlined its charter in the 107 clauses of the Bill. Other avenues have been spelt out. I do not think the structure of the office of the Commissioner for Complaints, which is like another little bureaucracy in itself given the way it is written into legislation, is the right setup at all for complaints as far as the ABC is concerned. I think the bureaucracy will run away with itself. There are other avenues, including the Commonwealth Ombudsman and, as I have mentioned, the Corporation Board. That is what it will be there for. If it acts responsibly, I really do not see that there should be a great deal of concern in that area. For all those reasons I oppose the clauses from clause 80 onwards dealing with the Commissioner for Complaints.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (9.11)-ln supporting the amendment I want to speak very briefly about the proposal to create a Commissioner for Complaints. I feel obliged to comment that this proposal appears to be politically motivated. Time and time again members on the Government side of this chamber have criticised the Australian Broadcasting Commission for its program content. Frequently such criticism has involved accusations that ABC commentators have displayed bias against the Government, against Government members or against political parties supporting the Government. It appears to me that the sole purpose of the proposed Commissioner for Complaints is to provide an institutionalised channel for noisy, conservative and bigoted critics of the ABC to organise campaigns designed to force the ABC to refrain from reporting or commenting objectively on political, social and economic aspects of Australian life.
I suggest that if there is to be a Commissioner for Complaints the office should be redesignated 'Commissioner for Public Comment'. The functions of the Commissioner could then be expanded to include the monitoring of written approval and congratulatory comments on programs of the Corporation. I am asking the Government to consider changing the title and expanding the functions of the Commissioner in

the way that I have suggested so that the Commissioner can obtain a balanced view of the opinions of listeners to and viewers of ABC programs. Thus, for example, if the ABC offers a program about a controversial matter such as uranium mining or homosexuality, it is inevitable that the Commissioner will receive a large number of complaints. For the Commissioner to be in a position to monitor public opinion on the matter, it is essential that opinions of both a critical and a congratulatory nature be considered. If this does not happen, a shrill and vocal minority such as the League of Rights could ensure that balanced programs on, say, prison reform were not produced. It is quite possible that the Commissioner would assume that the League of Rights represented a majority of the community when in fact it represents a very small minority of the community. It is because of this very important need for the kind of balance I have indicated and for the other reasons indicated by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) and the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) that I support the amendment.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (9.14)-When I was speaking on these clauses a moment ago I indicated that there were two categories of complaint. One was the complaint against the individual. I think the Ombudsman has said that he is capable of dealing with that, and we think he is better able to deal with that than some little apparatchik that the Government might appoint as the Commissioner for Complaints. But there are other kinds of complaints, and the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) has correctly pointed out that the Ombudsman is incapable of dealing with programming matters. It seems to us that the Minister cannot, on the one hand, invoke Dix in relation to the appointment of the Board and say that the Dix Committee of Review into the Australian Broadcasting Commission has rejected the notion of parliamentary committees having a role in the appointment of members of the Board and at the same time reject what the Dix Committee has said in relation to complaints. Nowhere in the Dix Commitee's report did it recommend this kind of procedure.
The Dix Committee considered in some depth the question of the interaction of the ABC with its audience. It indicated that the ABC was responsive to remarks which were communicated to it by its audience. But it indicated that the procedures for handling those comments and complaints were thoroughly inadequate. What it proposed was that there should be established in each State a community affairs officer who was able to handle those complaints. The Dix Committee was

1590 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

of the view that, so long as the facility existed for the ABC to receive and process those complaints, then it could be relied upon to respond to those complaints or criticisms in a reasonable way. We think that is the best way to go. If we have a Board which is fairly appointed and responsible for running the Corporation, then that is the body which ought to be charged with the responsibilities of ensuring that programs are not biased and are not offensive in the terms of the Bill.
I have indicated, of course, that there will always be occasions when some programs will be offensive to some people. There will be some programs which some people will think are unfair or biased. But that is the very nature of broadcasting. That is the very nature of providing a vehicle for public criticism, for public examination of matters of great public importance. What the ultimate function of the Board must be is to ensure that there are no campaigns waged against particular points of view in the community, or that some points of view are ignored altogether or misrepresented unfairly or persistently. That surely is the role of the Board and to set up some little Hitler who is the Commissioner for Complaints to determine what is offensive and what is biased seems to us to be a thoroughly threatening and offensive proposal. When we consider the powers that the Government is proposing to give this creature, for instance, power to enter premises, power to require individuals to appear before it, powers to require submissions to be given on oath, powers to require the furnishing of documents, and so on, and so forth, it is obviously a case--
Mr N. A. Brown-The Ombudsman has those powers.
Mr DAWKINS-The Ombudsman does have those powers, but they are in respect of an entirely limited function. The limited function is this: Is a public instrumentality offending against the civil liberties or the privacy of an individual? The Minister is talking about questions relating to offensiveness, unfairness or alleged bias. That takes us into an entirely different realm altogether. If we are dealing with questions of offending civilliberties of people or intruding on people's privacy by a public organisation, then of course the Ombudsman must have untrammelled rights to investigate those complaints and to bring the public officers responsible to book for them. But when we are talking about whether something which is broadcast over the ABC is offensive, unfair, or biased, it seems to me, and it seems to the Opposition, entirely inappropriate to give this sort of person these sorts of powers to investigate those matters which in the end are not simply resolvable.

It may be that five years down the track, if this proposal ever gets off the ground, we will discover that there are not many complaints investigated or the sorts of horrendous possibilities to which I am pointing never eventuate. But if they do not, it will be for one reason and one reason only; that is, the existence of this part in the Act will so intimidate the ABC that it will never be adventurous enough to examine anything of a contentious nature. If the Minister intends that the ABC should be a tame cat, mealy-mouthed organisation, which will broadcast only those matters which do not offend anybody, which nobody can criticise as being unfair or biased, then he has a very perverted view of what this great organisation ought to be about. It is the pre-eminent source of information for this community. It is the pre-eminent source of providing an opportunity for criticism of society and for the airing of a variety of views. If the creation of this monster, this commissioner for complaints, leads to a situation in which the ABC and the individuals working for it are so intimidated and threatened by it, the Minister will, inadvertently I expect, have done an enormous disservice to the ABC and to Australia as a whole. I am not sure that the Minister really knows what he is doing in relation to this matter. I suspect that this has been foisted upon him by some individuals within the Government.
Mr N. A. Brown-A Trojan horse.
Mr DAWKINS-Well, I do not know. It has all the hallmarks of a bit of Trojan horse politics engineered by the National Country Party. The National Country Party has always been paranoid about the so-called left wing bias of the ABC. Country Party members never for a moment think to contemplate the outrageous bias of the rural programs conducted by the ABC. I do not want to embark on a criticism of the ABC as far as that is concerned, but we have the evidence from 1975 of the total paranoia of the Country Party in relation to the activities of the ABC. My guess is that the Country Party, through the agency of people such as the Minister for Transport (Mr Nixon) and the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair), has forced this measure upon the Minister. Perhaps it has come directly from his predecessor, but it does appear to us that it has come from the Country Party. It is an attempt to intimidate, neutralise and castrate the ABC in such a way that it becomes a totally ineffectual organisation. I do not for a moment think that that is the Minister's objective. From everything that he has said it appears that he agrees that the ABC has an important role to play in a pluralist society and, indeed, has a positive function to tend the pluralist society.

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1591

1 beseech the Minister to re-examine this proposal, to consider what might be done with these sorts of horrendous powers, implicitly or explicitly. It does represent a huge threat to the dissemination of public information and, more importantly, to providing the ABC with an untrammelled function to be critical of society and of sacred cows within the community, including politicians. Politicians have no right to impose this sort of control on the ABC just to protect themselves from what in most cases is totally justified criticism. We should not be afraid of the sort of criticism that the ABC can visit upon us. We ought to ensure that the ABC has complete power, complete freedom to exercise and promote its proper functions.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-Minister for Communications) (9.23)-1 say at the outset that the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) seems to have changed his views somewhat. For the purpose of educating myself on the subject. I took the opportunity of examining some of the submissions that were made to the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission and discovered a very illuminating submission made by the honourable member in 1980. He seems to have changed his views somewhat since 1980. Why, I do not know.
Mr Dawkins-It was a good submission.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Well, it is an interesting submission. The honourable member in that submission to the Dix Committee proposed, among other things, the following:
Perhaps some form of complaints review board could be established so that all complaints whether from politicians or others are dealt with in the same way and would ensure that individual members of the ABC management are not subjected to harassment.
Apparently when the honourable member made that submission in 1980 it was not a case--
Mr Dawkins-That is the community affairs officer.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Nonsense; the honourable member used the words 'complaints review board'. Frankly, I do not care whether we call it a complaints commissioner or a complaints review board. The fact is that when .the honourable member for Fremantle was a free agent-before being shackled by a decision taken in some dark back room by the Australian Labor Party Executive when he was forced to put this argument-he was advocating that there should be a complaints review board which, for all I know, might be identical to the complaints commissioner that the Government is proposing. I congratulate the

honourable member for advocating in his submission in 1980 to the Dix Committee that there should be a complaints review board and for advocating that the purpose of that complaints review board should be the investigation of complaints made about programs on the Australian Broadcasting Commission. It was not good enough then, in 1980, for the Commission to examine complaints and it was not good enough then for the Ombudsman to examine complaints against the ABC; otherwise, presumably, the honourable member would have said that to the Dix Committee. He did not say that the Commission could examine complaints itself and he did not say that the Ombudsman had power to examine complaints against the ABC. Rather, he was advocating in 1980 that a new body should be established. This legislation seeks to establish a new body for that reason. The honourable member was right when he said there was a need for an independent body to investigate complaints against programming on the national broadcaster. He was right when he said, by implication, that the Ombudsman did not have powers to investigate those complaints. We seem to be on common ground about that. Let me make it clear what the Dix Committee said about the powers of the Ombudsman and what the Ombudsman himself has said about his powers. Page 118 of the Dix Committee report stated:
The ABC's accountability through this mechanism--
That is, the Ombudsman--
is limited, however, and in general terms the Ombudsman's powers of investigation are not applicable to programming matters.
There, surely, is a clear statement by the Dix Committee that the Ombudsman does not have adequate powers and does not have those powers necessary to investigate complaints against programming. The honourable member for Fremantle believes, and the Government believes, that the powers should be such that there is a mechanism for the investigation of those complaints. That is what the Dix Committee said; that there was clearly a need for some additional power because the Ombudsman's powers were not adequate. The Ombudsman himself, in his 1980 report, said:
I cannot review programming decisions made by the Commission in the exercise of its responsibilities as the national broadcaster unless there is some. element of defective administration going beyond the merits of a programming decision, as for example where there is a complaint that there was a selection of material intended to prejudice the legitimate interests of some person.
So the Ombudsman himself in his 1980 report made it clear that his powers were limited. I would have thought that was a good argument for having an additional body with additional powers,

1592 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

if it can be justified that that body and those powers should exist to pursue this very important matter of protecting the rights of individual citizens. The honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) spoke against this proposal. 1ask him the following question: What if the ABC had a critical program on the honourable member and did not give him the right to reply or any notice that it intended to expose whatever it was it wanted to expose about him, falsely, without any factual basis for it? Surely it is only fair that the honourable member for La Trobe should have some right of redress. That mayor may not be actionable as libel and it is only fair that there should be some structure to enable him and people in that position to defend themselves, to have the complaint properly aired and the public informed by some means or other as to what the truth of the situation was and that the broadcaster had not behaved properly in presenting such a program.
Mr Milton-I raise a point of order. The Minister has asked me a question. May 1answer it?
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)- There is no point of order.
Mr N. A. BROWN-My next point is important because it relates to the remarks of the honourable member for La Trobe. It is obvious that he and some other people who have spoken in this debate have not read the Bill. 1 have two reasons for saying that. If they look at clause 81 they will find that the complaints commissioner is not obliged to investigate complaints in two circumstances: First of all, if they are frivolous or vexatious. That would dispose of many of the high-flying examples that have been given here tonight of the sorts of things that will be investigated by the Complaints Commissioner. He is not, 1 repeat, obliged to investigate complaints if people are being frivolous or vexatious.
Secondly, he is not obliged to investigate complaints if the person complaining does not have a sufficient interest. Virtually all those matters which the honourable member for La Trobe raised would be excluded. A person cannot come along and say: 'I object to the ABC having a program about the destruction of forests because of the timber industry, simply because 1like trees'. He would not get to first base. The Complaints Commissioner would say: 'You do not have a sufficient interest in this. Come back to me when the ABC broadcasts a program which invades your privacy, or is biased against you, or is unfair to you. Then you can come back and complain, but do not complain simply because you do not like the program'.
Mr YoungWill he accept a class action?

Mr N. A. BROWN-That is another issue which we will have to look at on another day. I can see that the honourable member for Port
Adelaide understands the issue fairly and squarely. A person must be interested in the matter before the complaint can be compulsorily pursued by the Complaints Commissioner. The other suggestion was that the Board of Directors could investigate complaints.
Mr Young-If you had a good board you would not have so many complaints.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Perhaps. That may be so, depending on who was on the Board. However, the point is that it is foolish to suggest that if complaints are made against the ABC the proper body to investigate the complaints should be the Board. The ABC would be a judge in its own cause, and no citizen complaining to the ABC could be satisfied, without making any reflection on the membership of the Board, that he was getting a fair and independent hearing. It is foolish to suggest that it is a proper mechanism of investigation of complaints to have the Board investigate the complaints. It is equally foolish to suggest that a community affairs officer can investigate the complaints because the community affairs officer would be an employee of the ABC. Again, the complainant could not reasonably expect to believe that he would always get a fair and independent hearing if the complaint were to be investigated by an employee of the ABC. The employee may indeed do a fair job; he may try to be impartial, but this is an issue of justice and it is important that justice should be seen to be done as wen as be done. The community at large has an interest in ensuring that complaints are investigated by an independent body, not by the body about whom the complaint is made.
Next, the suggestion that this is an attempt to restrict the ABC in some political way is rejected strongly by the Government, and the Government is incensed that that suggestion should be made. The whole thrust of the Government's responses on the ABC has been to make it more independent. The Australian Labor Party was in government for three years. It did not write into the ABC's statute that it should be independent. We have put into the Bill for the first time a provision that the ABC should be independent. We have given it a charter for the first time so that it knows in what direction it should be going. It has a charter and its independence is statutorily guaranteed, which it has never been before. It is unfair to say that the Government is seeking to restrict the ABC in any way. It is not seeking to do that at all. It is seeking to set up a proper mechanism by which the citizen has his rights protected

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1593

and preserved, his privacy guaranteed, and gets a independence of the ABC, we believe that organ-

fair go if he is the subject of a program on the isation should decide for itself whether to appoint

ABC. That is a matter of paramount concern to community affairs officers in each State to handle

me and to the Government.

questions of complaints. For those reasons, and

It should be noted in this regard that the BBCthe British Broadcasting Corporation-has a complaints commission. Without taking honourable members' time, I invite them to look at the annual report and handbook of the BBC. A copy of that report is in the Parliamentary Library, I

particularly for the reason that the honourable member for Fremantle suggested when he was a free agent which was virtually the same thing as we are putting forward, we believe the clause with respect to the complaints commissioner should remain in the Bill as it is.

believe, but I will make a copy available to The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)-

honourable members if they wish to read it. There The question is that the Part proposed to be omit-

is a structure very similar to what we propose for ted stand part of the Bill.

the ABC. Is it suggested that successive Labour

and Conservative governments in Britain were by that means--
Mr Young-How do they appoint their board?

Mr Dawkins-If I can seek your indulgence for a moment, the Opposition does not intend to divide the Committee on this occasion, but that is not an indication of our lack of resolve and we will

Mr N. A. BROWN-I do not know how the certainly persist with this matter in another place.

British Broadcasting Corporation appoints its Amendment negatived.

Board. I will look it up. But all decisions on appointments must be made by the Government.

Clauses agreed to.

If the BBC has a better method of appointing its Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a

governors than we have of appointing our direcwhole.

tors I will certainly look at that proposal.

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (9.39)-1 wish to

It should be made clear that the BBC has a move an amendment to clause 106. I move:

complaints commissioner structure which is very similar to what we propose here. It surely cannot be suggested that successive Labour and Con-

Page 65, after clause 106 insert the following new clause: Community affairs officers

servative governments in Britain have tried to strangle the BBC or that by some political motivation they have tried to restrict the subjects

"106A. The Corporation shall appoint a community affairs officer in each State of the Commonwealth, whose duty it shall be to receive, and reply to, questions and complaints from the public. ".

examined by that body. That is an absurd suggestion. It is equally absurd to suggest that we are seeking to do that in this case. The purpose of appointing a Commissioner for Complaints is to give the citizens a fair go, to ensure that a proper and independent body is established so that complaints can be fairly and independently investigated.

The amendment would require the Corporation to appoint community affairs officers in each State. I take this opportunity to indicate what might seem to be a fairly cute revelation by the Minister for Communications (Mr N.A. Brown) of my attitude in 1980 to these matters. A couple of things ought to be said. First, when I was making submissions to the Dix Committee-and I

Finally I would like to say something about the might indicate that I was one of a very few

amendment relating to community affairs officers. members of parliament who took the trouble to

If honourable members read the Government's make a submission to the Dix Committee-I was

responses of 4 July to the Dix Committee report concerned about the behaviour of the Australian

they will see that we supported that recommenBroadcasting Commission. If the Minister likes to

dation. But that is a matter for the ABC itself; it is read my submission in detail he will see that it re-

not a matter for government. The Opposition lates to the Western Australian operation of the

talks about our intruding into the ABC. The OpAustralian Broadcasting Commission. On that

position is suggesting that we should direct the occasion I cited a number of instances where I

ABC by amending the Bill before the chamber to considered that the Commission had behaved

tell that body whom it should employ, to tell it the badly and had been involved in political manipu-

sorts of positions it should fill. I think it would be lation. What I was proposing at that time was that

absurd for us to pass legislation which would dithere should be come form of mechanism for deal-

rect the ABC to employ community affairs ing with those matters. The Dix Committee con-

officers. As I say, we support the Dix Committee sidered that matter and obviously decided that

recommendation but, consistent with the there was not sufficient merit in it.

1594 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

The other point that ought to be made is that at that time the Commonwealth Ombudsman, whose office had been established only in 1977, had not had the opportunity to examine those sorts of complaints against the ABC. If one were to read what the Ombudsman has said more recently one would find that the great majority of his complaints against the ABC have come from the Western Australian part of the operation which in a sense confirms what I was saying about my criticism of the ABC in Western Australia. I am happy to accept, now that the Ombudsman has had the opportunity to examine these sorts of matters and has been able to indicate a role for himself in relation to these matters--
Mr Mr N. A. Brown-He said that he can't do it.
Mr DAWKINS-No, that is not what he said. I invite the Minister-I am sure he has already done so-to refer to the inquiry that was launched by the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs. On 7 September it had before it Professor Richardson who, at page 36 of the transcript, talked about the sorts of complaints that had been received by him in relation to a dispute between the Principal of the Perth Technical College and the ABC in which the Principal had his point of view misrepresented. That is the sort of matter which I think the Ombudsman ought to be able to investigate, and indeed that the Ombudsman himself believes he ought to be able to investigate. The problem is that the ABC will not accept the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman in that regard.
I think the sorts of matters about which I was complaining in my submission and the sorts of remedies which I was proposing can very largely but not completely be dealt with by an acceptance by the ABC of the legitimate role of the Ombudsman. In respect of other matters which go beyond the role of the Ombudsman I am now convinced that the best way of dealing with that is to have a better constituted Board. One has to contemplate my submission at that time in the context of the Commission as it then existed and as it now exists. At the moment it is largely a creature of the Government. It happens to have upon it stooges of the Government. The former finance chairman of the Liberal Party in Western Australia is still a member of it, just to name one.
Mr John Brown-What is his name?
Mr DAWKINS-It is Horgan or something like that. He continues to be a member of the Commission and, no doubt, the Minister thinks he is an appropriate appointment and the sort of appointment which he would make in the future.

The Minister does not mind if he has the odd tax dodger on the Commission; so long as he is an official of the Liberal Party, that will do the Minister.
Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Deputy Chairman, I take a point of order. I am not asking the honourable member to withdraw remarks. I do not ask honourable members to withdraw remarks made about me because I believe we have to be able to take it here. I just want to register my utter revulsion of what the honourable member has just suggested.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)- Knowing the honourable member for Fremantle asldol--
Mr DAWKINS-Mr Chairman, I also do not ask for things to be withdrawn.
Mr N. A. Brown-Just as well.
Mr DAWKINS-No, indeed. The point is, however, that the Minister has condoned the appointment and has not moved to get rid of that member of the Commission.
Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Deputy Chairman, I object to that equally strongly. I wish the honourable member would get on with the subject in hand.
Mr DAWKINS-Well, get rid of Horgan. The other point I just quickly want to take up with the Minister is that he has largely misrepresented the United Kingdom situation as far as the British Broadcasting Corporation is concerned. It is true that the BBC has a complaints mechanism but nowhere in that charter will one find any reference to complaints relating to offensive programs or biased programs. Very largely it deals with the question of infringement of privacy, or the unfair treatment of individuals on those programs. That is a very important distinction. That is the sort of distinction the Ombudsman has made in his role in relation to complaints against the ABC. So, the Minister cannot invoke the BBC precedent as an excuse for this proposal which he is now putting before us.
To return to the particular clause which we are debating, the Dix Committee has indicated that it is confident that the ABC does have the capacity to respond to complaints which it receives from the community. What it has pointed to is that it does not have the capacity to deal with the complaints. If it cannot deal with the complaints or process them, obviously it cannot respond to them. So, requiring the Corporation to establish community affairs officers, which is a recommendation of the Dix Committee, will facilitate the

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1595

processing and receiving of those particular complaints and therefore allow the Commission to respond to them.
Of course, I think it is quite slick for the Minister to refer to an earlier submission of mine. I am perfectly happy to stand by it and to recognise what I said at that time. I am perfectly happy to say that I now think that a number of the matters which I raised at that time have now been clarified as a result of the 1980 report of the Ombudsman in relation to the ABC. But, more importantly, with a reconstituted commission, a commission which is more broadly based and more capable of dealing with these matters, I am happy to leave it to the Commission to deal with those particular matters, particularly if the new Corporation has the capacity at the State level to deal with those complaints.
What has to be recognised, and what the Dix Committee pointed out, was that most of the complaints which are now received are dealt with by the appropriate State manager. I do not know whether the Minister had the misfortune to know the senior management of the Western Australian operation a few years ago. They were a dreadful bunch who were prepared to be stood over by the Liberal Party Premier of Western Australia. The Liberal Party Premier was able to carpet the State Manager of the ABC and to tell him what he thought ought to be on his programs. That was the sort of objection which I was making. Also the head of the newsroom of the ABC in Western Australia was prepared to receive and respond to a phone call from a prominent Liberal Party member of the State Parliament in respect of the ABC's treatment of a campaign against the closure of a particular railway line which was going on a couple of weeks before the last State election. That is what I was complaining about-blatant political misuse of the ABC and a timid bunch of sycophants within the ABC in Perth who were prepared to kowtow to political pressure. Hopefully, and happily, that is not the typical sort--
Mr N. A. BrowD-They might be listening to you.
Mr DAWKINS-They know my views. In fact they went absolutely puce during the hearings of the Dix Committee, frothing at the mouth about what I had said. But they knew what I had said was true and the Dix Committee could scarcely believe its ears when it heard the responses from the people whom I criticised. Happily, the State Manager has now gone on to other things and the head of the newsroom also departed his office. That fact has been unlamented by practically everybody in the ABC in Western Australia. I am

on firm ground in criticising those individuals. There are lots of marvellous people within the ABC in Western Australia. What was wrong was that there were a couple of people at the top who were preventing the ABC from fulfilling its proper obligation. I would not want to claim that my criticism of the ABC in Perth related to conduct typical of the ABC elsewhere. That is what we are talking about in this debate.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (9.49)-1 simply want to say two things about the British Broadcasting Corporation. One relates to the question which was put by way of an interjection by the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young). I have noticed in paragraph 6.11 of the report of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission the statement that:
Although Commissioners of the ABC, like Governors of the BBC, are appointed by the government of the day . . . .
SO, in fact, the Governors of the BBC are appointed by the government, which is the case in Australia under the present situation, was the case under the Labor Government between 1972 and 1975, and will be the case when this Bill passes into law. Secondly, may I say without taking up honourable members' time too much, that I would invite them again to look at the Annual Report and Handbook 1982 of the BBC. If they do that and look at the provisions with respect to the BBC Programs Complaints Commission they will see that on the whole it is a fair statement to make that the powers and functions of the Complaints Commission of the BBC are similar to those of the Complaints Commission we propose to establish. If one looks at the definition of a complaint for the BBC under its charter one can see that a complaint means a complaint to the Commission of any 'unjust or unfair treatment' or 'unwarranted infringement of privacy' as is mentioned in subsection 1. If one reads the whole part it is fairly clear that although the word 'bias' is not used one can say: 'I received unfair treatment on the BBC because it interviews my political opponent and heavily weighed the program in his favour and refused to interview me'. That is clearly bias and it would be a function of the BBC Programs Complaints Commission to investigate such an incident. So it is fair to say that they are similar bodies.
Amendment negatived.
Remainder of Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

1596 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown)-by leave-read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION (TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND CONSEQUENTIAL
AMENDMENTS) BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 9 September, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (9.54)- The Opposition simply wants to take this opportunity to indicate its opposition to clause 20. The transmitters the Australian Broadcasting Commission uses are, in fact, operated and maintained by Telecom Australia but are to be transferred to the proposed new Australian Broadcasting Corporation. The Opposition is of the view that this is entirely inappropriate. The transmitters should remain with Teiecom. It was the view of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission that they ought to remain with Telecom. We agree with the Dix Committee in relation to that. It is not a matter that we want to debate at any length. I simply want to say that the ABC does pay Telecom for the use of these transmitters and, in return, Telecom ensures that they are operated and maintained. We see no special reason why that situation should not continue.
While it may be possible to make out a case for the transfer to the ABC of these transmitters that are manned and are largely in the metropolitan area, it seems to us that the Government would involve the ABC in immense additional expense if the Government transferred to it the remote transmitters, which are not serviced permanently by technical officers. The ABC would have to ensure that technicians-which currently they do not employ or train-were located in areas remote from major metropolitan centres. On the other hand Telecom has, all over Australia, such technicians involved in work relating to other telecommunications operations of Telecom. They are already on the ground and capable of responding to breakdowns which might occur in the transmitters. I understand that they are able to have them on the air again very rapidly. I doubt that the ABC could do that without the expenditure of

a vast additional sum to ensure that technicians and other facilities were available in those areas.
It would be the worst of all possible worlds to transfer the manned transmitters in the metropolitan area to the ABC, yet leave the others under the control of Telecom. Telecom would not want that, even if the ABC did, so we believe that the existing situation ought to continue in the way in which the Dix Committee said it should. For that reason, I move:
Delete clause 20.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (9.58)-For similar reasons to those expressed by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins), I support the amendment he has moved for the deletion of clause 20 and would like to spend a few moments outlining my objections to the clause. I do not believe that the transfer of the detailed and functional responsibilities to the ABC will benefit it. Also, it is really not supported by the Dix Committee of Review into the Australian Broadcasting Commission or, in fact, the engineering consultants to that inquiry. In speaking to the second reading motion I asked the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) why the Government had overturned those decisions. One could well ask him again. Paragraph 25.76 of the Dix report, at page 296, states:
No reason would seem to exist to prevent such detailed responsibility as now exists for transmitter functions from staying mainly with Telecom, shifting however the functional responsibility from the Department of Communications to the ABC.
Once again, paragraph 25.82, at page 698, states in part:
We think that no important interest of the ABC would be served by it seeking to play the role of employer of operational staff for the transmitters for the time being. Indeed, for it to take on such detailed technical functions could place strains on the organisation, particularly in the industrial relations field, which it would be ill-equipped to handle for some time.
Just to complete my remarks in that regard I turn to recommendation 25.106, at page 703, which states:
we are of the view that the ABC should acquire-
Consideration interrupted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I shall report progress.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1597

Question resolved in the negative.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION (TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND CONSEQUENTIAL
AMENDMENTS) BILL 1982
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (10.1)-1 return to the final recommendation of the Dix Committee. Paragraph 25.106 states:
We are of the view that the ABC should acquire 'control', in the sense of being the body functionally responsible for the operation and maintenance of the National transmitter network and associated technical facilities. Telecom Australia should continue to perform on a commercial but not an exclusive basis its present operational role in relation to transmitter administration in such a way that no disruption of present employment takes place and so that services can continue to be provided with their present economy of scale and integration with other of Telecom's continent-wide functions.
The Dix Committee says that. Its expert consultant, Mr Morrison, gave similar advice to that inquiry. This is why the recommendations came down.
If this change is to go ahead, financial costs will be incurred. There will be industrial relations difficulties with personnel shifting across to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and finding their careers limited. Some will drop out. Obviously many skills will disappear. There will be a low rate of retention of skilled technical staff within Telecom Australia. These are just some of the areas of concern that I have. There is one other area of concern, apart from efficiency. Telecom, through its wide-ranging network, is able to rectify faults within a few hours, just about anywhere. That will not occur after the changeover because the ABC, within the foreseeable future and for quite a long time-lam talking many years ahead-will just not be able to match Telecom in this area of service. If it could it would be a stupid waste, in fact a doubling-up, of facilities. Telecom has the network and it has the efficiency. It is not looking to control the transmitters but to operate them on a day to day basis. It is sensible to look at maintenance. I urge the Government to look at the clause again. I do not know why the Dix Committee's view was overturned or how the Government came to the conclusions it did.
Mr N. A. Brown-Telecom does not want to do the work.
Mr CHARLES-Has the Minister spoken to the union? I do not believe the union or its members have that view. In fact, I am sure they do not have that view. I see no reason why this clause as it is should go through. I think it would

be a bad thing in all the areas I have mentioned. I urge the Government to reconsider its actions.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.3)-1 will speak only briefly. I reiterate support for the amendment moved by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). I oppose the transfer of these transmitter operations from Telecom Australia to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. This is a retrograde step and it is inefficient to transfer the responsibilities in this way. It has already been pointed out that the Dix Committee of Review into the Australian Broadcasting Commission was not in favour of the proposal concerning the operating of the transmitters being taken away from Telecom, so I will not dwell on that matter.
The first point I make is that it will be costly to transfer the operations. At present Telecom provides support services in the areas of mechanical aids, building, engineering services, stores, transport and drafting services. When the transfer takes place either the support services will not be available or the ABC will be required to pay Telecom Australia for the provision of those services. A particular problem with the proposed transfer is the fact that the ABC will of necessity be forced to offer employment to the 600 members of the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association who work in Telecom. The technical staff concerned is not satisfied that the existing ABC Staff Association can adequately represent its interests. In fact, the existing ABC technical staff, numbering some 200, is not happy with its representation by the Staff Association at present, so here we have the potential for industrial unrest, as the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) just pointed out. This is quite unnecessary if the operations remain under the control of Telecom. It is a fact that the ABC is, quite naturally, dominated by people who are involved in the development of programs. That is proper but the interests of the technical staff and the importance of the engineering aspects of broadcasting are minimised. There is a high probability that a number of the technical staff will not be willing to transfer from Telecom to the ABC. That will pose serious difficulties for the ABC in providing the skilled staff necessary to operate the transmitters.
Another matter which causes concern is that the Government is proposing that the planning and installation functions of the transmitter are to be made the responsibility of the Department of Communications with only the operation function being transferred to the ABC. Planning, installation and operations are all part of a whole and to separate the functions will mean that the

1598 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

flow of information between the function areas will be severely impeded and there will be a consequential reduction in the overall knowledge and skills held by the present integrated and dedicated team of skilled technical staff.
It is important to draw attention to the fact that 40 of the 80 television transmitters are manually serviced and Telecom operates both commercial and ABC transmitters within the one building, with one common tower. The commercial operators have made it clear that they are most concerned that the transfer of the transmitter operations to the ABC will mean that the responsibility for operating their transmitters will pass to a competitor. It is a strong possibility, therefore, that the commercial operators will wish to remove their transmitters from the control of the ABC. Such an action would not be necessary were Telecom permitted to operate the transmitters. It is difficult to see why the Government has proposed the transfer of operations against the recommendations of the Dix Committee. The decision will almost certainly cause industrial unrest. Technical staff who are asked to transfer must be given the opportunity to transfer to a new area of work and all opportunities for retraining must be offered to those officers. The transfer of the operations should not require the technical officers concerned to change their place of residence.
Finally, the Government should give a guarantee that if it is determined to press ahead with the proposed transfer of the transmitter operations, none of the technical staff involved will lose their employment with Telecom as a result of the deployment of staff. 1oppose clause 20 of the Bill.
Amendment negatived.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown)-by leave-read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION
Consideration resumed from 23 March, on the following papers presented by Mr Sinclair:
Report of the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission and Consultants' Reports.
and on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the House take note of the papers.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION: COMMITTEE OF
REVIEW
Government Response and Ministerial Statement
Consideration resumed from 17 August, on the following paper presented by Mr N. A. Brown:
Australian Broadcasting Commission-report by Committee of Review-Government Response-Ministerial Statement, 17 August 1982.
and on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the House take note of the paper.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
ADJOURNMENT
Newspaper Article: Migration-Parliamentary Amnesty Group: Poland-Australian Apple Industry-Tax Avoidance
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.10)-1 draw the attention of the House to a newspaper article which has been sent to me by an Australian who has recently returned from a visit to the United Kingdom. The article was published on the front page of a newspaper published in the United Kingdom called Australian Outlook. 1 have a copy with me. This newspaper is described as the original and leading newspaper for migrants and visitors to Australia. The article was headed in banner headlines 'Australia Offers Good Life'. The article commenced:
The Australian economy may be in a slump, but the average person there has little to complain about and enjoys a high standard of living, according to a leading economist.
The leading economist turned out to be emeritus Professor A. H. Pollard. 1 am proud to be an Australian citizen and as a migrant from England 1 want people from Britain to be well aware of the many advantages migrants can gain from making a new life in Australia. But the article in question was scandalously inaccurate in a way which would totally mislead potential migrants with regard to the economic and social conditions in Australia. Figures about household income, the purchasing power of average weekly earnings, numbers of motor vehicle registrations and the average cost of a car, following the words 'Australians have never had it so good' were all wrong. 1 do not have time to detail the inaccuracies except to say that they were substantial and that they were presented and selected with the sole intention of indicating that life for the average family in Australia is far rosier than it really is. The

Adjournment

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1599

second half of the article referred mainly to income tax and was so misleading that I will quote from it. It said:
. . . the proportion of tax paid by a person with a dependent spouse (with a 1980-81 income of $10,000) had fallen 10.6 per cent while the proportion paid by a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children had fallen 21 per cent.
A taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children and earning $18,360 was paying 18.7 per cent less tax proportionately than six years ago.
'Clearly the last six years has been a period of significant fall in the real income tax burden', Professor Pollard said.
The gross inaccuracy of these figures can be seen by comparable statistics taken from an article by Ann Harding in the 1 July 1982 edition of the Current Affairs Bulletin, a most reputable journal. That article shows that a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and an average wage of $10,770 was paying 9.1 per cent net tax as a proportion of income in 1975-76 and 11.8 per cent in 1981-82, a 29.7 per cent increase. By comparing the latter figure with the decrease of 10.6 per cent as stated by Professor Pollard one can see the extent of the inaccuracies. The Current Affairs Bulletin aricle also shows that a taxpayer with a dependant spouse and two children with an average wage of $16,654 was paying 13.4 per cent net tax as a proportion of income in 1975-76 and 16.3 per cent in 1981-82, a 21.6 per cent increase. Although not strictly comparable, a comparison of this figure with a decrease of 18.7 per cent on an income of $18,360, as stated by Professor Pollard, is sufficient to ascertain the wild inaccuracies of the Australian Outlook article.
The article is equally misleading in its omissions. For example, it makes no mention of the reduction of government expenditure on the social wage. Government funds for State education, welfare, health and public housing have all declined but no mention was made in this article of the effects of such cuts on the living standards of the average Australians. I consider that it is a very serious matter when inaccuracies such as those I have pointed out in the article in the Australian Outlook are widely published as though they are factual. We do not want to attract migrants to Australia on the basis of such false information. I believe the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) should ask the Australian High Commissioner in London to look into this matter. I hope that the High Commissioner will be able to provide answers to the following questions: Who is the publisher of Australian Outlook? Is the publisher aware of the inaccuracies? On what basis was Professor Pollard used as a reputable contributor? Will the High Commissioner's office be asked to monitor

this newspaper to ascertain whether any other inaccurate information about Australia is published? If so, will the High Commissioner take all possible steps to inform potential migrants to Australia that this newspaper is not a reliable source of information about Australia?
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (10.15)-All too often in this Parliament members appear to be at loggerheads and in disagreement. There are, I think, significant areas of agreement that exist between members of the Parliament, and one of the areas of mutual interest is exemplified in the activities of the Parliamentary Group of Amnesty International. It is a group with which I have been associated in my time in the Parliament and it is widely supported, with membership drawn from all political parties. The Parliamentary Amnesty Group has been active in relation to the human rights issues affecting a number of other countries at various times. One of the principal causes that the Group has taken up at present involves the situation in Poland.
The Parliamentary Amnesty Group, aware that Amnesty International had called for special action on Poland, has initiated a petition. Some 136 members of the Parliament have signed it. No one should draw any inference from the fact that some members have not signed the petition, because we were not able to get to everyone. The petition is in the following form:
To His Excellency. . . Ambassador of the Polish People's Republic. . . Yarralumla, A.C.T.
We the undersigned, members of the Australian Parliament and members of of the parliamentary Group of Amnesty International ask you to convey to your Government our concern at:
I. The continued detention without trial of members of the Solidarity Free Trade Union and of the political rights group K.O.R.
2. reports that the Polish Government intends prosecuting and sentencing to detention or death some of those detainees in a manner which infringes internationally accepted conventions.
Accordingly we calI upon the Polish government to refrain from such practices, if intended, and to release political detainees.
I do not think that it would come as news to members of this Parliament that people have been detained without being brought to trial and others are being dealt with in circumstances which any person interested in due process would regard as most inadequate. During the past eight months, the Polish Government has set out to destroy systematically the free trade union movement Solidarity. This has been achieved through the suspension of the union's right to represent the interests of the Polish people. The Polish Government has also, despite continued and vocal protest

1600 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Adjournment

of this sort from within the Parliamentary Group, and also from others within the international community, arrested and detained officials of Solidarity, including its leader, Lech Walesa. It has instituted a program of martial law under which the citizens of Poland have absolutely no rights to free association or the expression of opinion on public matters.
The crime of Lech Walesa and other members of Solidarity has been to seek to establish for the Polish people those basic rights which are guaranteed under the Polish Constitution, and by such organisations as the International Labor Organisation. The Polish Government has violated the basic civil rights of Polish citizens, many of whom have been subjected to constant harassment and coercion since the proclamation of martial law. It has detained without trial numbers of people, which vary between 600 and perhaps as many as 4,000, who are guilty of no crime other than seeking their basic rights. This brutal repression would, I think, be condemned by all in this Parliament and all Australians.
I could continue but my colleague the secretary of the Parliamentary Amnesty Group, the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley), will join me in commenting on these matters. I should like to make one other observation. I welcome the Government's acceptance of a proposal put by Amnesty International in Australia and by the Parliamentary Group that donations to the organisation Amnesty International be tax deductible. On 26 August the Treasurer announced that gifts of over $2 made to that organisation and a number of others would be allowable for income tax purposes. I welcome that initiative in a bipartisan way because it will be very helpful in enabling this organisation to continue its important task of bringing to public attention breaches of human rights wherever they occur.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.\9)-1 associate myself with the remarks made by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock), both in his expression of gratitude to the Treasurer for extending tax deductible status to donations to Amnesty International and in relation to the situation in Poland. Today he and I waited upon Polish Ambassador to present the petition signed by 136 members of this Parliament, from both this chamber and the Senate. We were informed by the Polish Ambassador that he was unable to accept that. By way of reporting to my parliamentary colleagues who signed that petition, it is now the intention of the Amnesty International Parliamentary Group to send that petition direct to the Polish martial law authorities. The fact that 136 members signed that petition is an indication of

the seriousness with which members of this House regard the matter of civil liberties, human rights and trade unions rights in Poland. There have been, in fact, 10 notices of motion given since this Parliament began by members on both sides of the House on various aspects of human rights in Poland. I am pleased to report that at the last Federal Conference of the Australian Labor Party a resolution on Poland was passed. I thought it was a very comprehensive and useful resolution, and I seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The resolution read as follows-
Poland
Conference supports the right of the Polish people to determine their own future free from external interference and pressure. Therefore, it condemns the imposition of martial law in Poland and the accompanying restriction of political, civil and trade union rights.
Conference urges the Polish government to release all political prisoners and restore civil liberties.
in recognition of the close relationship between a stable economy and political freedom in Poland, Conference urges Western governments to provide economic assistance.
Conference calls for the granting of exit visas to all Poles who wish to be reunited with their families living in Australia. It urges the Federal Government to apply all diplomatic pressure within its means to achieve this end.
Conference determines that this resolution should be conveyed to the Polish Embassy, Solidarity in Australia, and the Committee for Polish Family Reunions.
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. The petition that was circulated, of course, was a petition within the tradition of Amnesty International. Amnesty International does not comment on the system of government which brings about a situation in which substantial numbers of people in a particular country become political detainees. I seek leave to have the petition incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The petition read as follows-
Petition
To His Excellency Mr Ryszard Frackiewicz, Ambassador of the Polish People's Republic, 7 Turrana Street, Yarralumia, A.C.T.
We the undersigned, members of the Australian Parliament and members of the Parliamentary Group of Amnesty international ask you to convey to your Government our concern at:
\. The continued detention without trial of members of the Solidarity Free Trade Union and of the political rights group K.O.R.,
2. reports that the Polish Government intends prosecuting and sentencing to detention or death some of those detainees in a manner which infringes internationally accepted conventions.

Adjournment

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1601

Accordingly we call upon the Polish government to refrain from such practices, if intended, and to release political detainees.
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. The terms of the petition that was presented was along the lines of the traditional Amnesty statement. The petition specifically refers to the detention of members of the Solidarity Free Trade Union and the political rights group KOR. It reports that the Polish Government intends prosecuting and sentencing to detention or death some of those detainees in a manner which infringes internationally accepted conventions. Honourable members on both sides of the House have had a great deal more than that to say about Poland. They have said so by way of notices of motion and in the sorts of remarks made by the honourable member for Dundas in the chamber here tonight. I wish to make some further remarks on that matter. There is some possibility that towards the end of this year it has at least been promised that martiallaw will be lifted in Poland. It is not my belief that that will be a sufficient condition to ensure that the sorts of rights that began to be enjoyed by the Polish people before 1981 will be guaranteed. There have been subsequent amendments to the general law of Poland which will, in effect, keep in practice many of the reprehensible aspects of the martial law legal system. There will be future occasion in this chamber for comment on the system of laws applying in Poland. There will be plenty of opportunity to advocate, as I believe we should, a return in Poland to the agreement that was signed between the leaders of the Solidarity Free Trade Union and the Polish Government back in 1980. It was known as the Gdansk agreement and guaranteed a substantial number of political, social and economic rights for the Polish people. That was welcomed in this House at the time and it would be welcomed again by this House. It would be very much to the benefit of the Polish people and, I believe, to the economic recovery of Poland. Both those objectives are very much desired on both sides of this chamber.
Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (10.23)-1 wish to bring the very important subject of apples to the attention of the House tonight. It is a subject that is quite sensitive around this place, but I believe it is important for people here to understand just what is happening to the industry in Australia. Stanthorpe, in my electorate, is the home of the granny smith, a very famous apple and well worth eating. I can assure honourable members that if any of them get up to Maranoa they should come up through Stanthorpe and try those apples. In conjunction with the honourable members for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) and the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), I

had the pleasure of taking Mr Glen Best and Mr Glen Rodgers from Queensland and Mr Max Henderson and Mr Peter Forsyth from New South Wales to see the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). By the way, the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr 8aume) tells me that some very good apples are grown in his electorate I would just like to give him a bit of a plug.
Mr Cadman-And in Mitchell.
Mr IAN CAMERON-They are grown in Mitchell too. It seems as though the problem is Australia-wide. The only problem is that most of the apples are grown in Tasmania.
Mr Hodgman-Hear, hear!
Mr IAN CAMERON-And very good apples they are too. Unfortunately, because no markets are left in Europe, all the apples seem to be coming to Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria. The Minister said today in the House that a review of the freight equalisation scheme was taking place. He seemed quite firm that the scheme would not be changed. I think that is a pity.
If the Tasmanians have such wonderful apples-they grow them under such fantastic conditions down there; it never stops raining-I cannot see why they should not compete on the Australian market without a freight subsidy. Our growers do not get the subsidy to deliver their apples to, say, Brisbane and Sydney but the Tasmanians are getting the subsidy to run apples up the coast. Of course, the Queensland industry wants the subsidy completely withdrawn, but I believe to do that would be a little difficult. However, if it is fair enough for the Western Australians and South Australians to deliver apples to Sydney and compete, the Tasmanians ought to be able to do the same thing. As honourable members know, the scheme has been in operation for quite a while. It is interesting to read some of the figures. The Industries Assistance Commission, in its March 1980 report on apples and pears, made the following comments on the effect of the scheme:
By offsetting part of the freight cost on fruit shipped from Tasmania to mainland markets, the T.F.E.S. is likely to have exerted some downward pressure on mainland prices--
That certainly has happened. Tasmanian apples certainly are exerting a tremendous pressure on the local growers in Queensland and New South Wales. It is interesting that the Economics Department of the University of Tasmania assessed that if 80 per cent of Tasmania's exports-it is getting near that figure-had been diverted to the

1602 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Adjournment

mainland 1981 mainland prices would have dropped by about 19 per cent which on the 1981 average mid-season price of $6.50 a carton for granny smiths in Sydney represents a drop of $1.25 a carton. That is a pretty difficult situation for growers in Stanthorpe to compete against. They are finding it very difficult.
Mr Hodgman-Whose side are you on?
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am trying to support my apple growers. With approximately 11.5 million cartons of apples consumed within Australia that year, a reduction of $1.25 a carton would represent a loss of $14m. That is a very substantial amount of money. Of course, 1.7 million cartons of apples will come to the mainland markets in 1982. That would represent a 90 per cent increase from the 900,000 cartons in 1981. 1 think it is important to remember that. It also would represent a jump from 32 per cent of the Tasmanian crop on mainland markets in 1981 to 66 per cent in 1982. Honourable members can see the enormous effect that the European collapse has had on the market.
1argue that the freight subsidy ought to be used to help to find new markets and perhaps to subsidise marketing even further in Europe. But in 1976-77 the cost to the Government of subsidising apples from Tasmania was $242,000. That figure has risen to $1.5m and is expected to cost approximately $2.5m in 1982. Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 have much pleasure in presenting those facts. 1 am sorry that it is such a sensitive subject in this place.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.28)-1 wish to continue the remarks 1 was endeavouring to make last night relating to tax avoidance devices. 1 was then trying, before 1 was interrupted, to point out that the tax avoidance devices successfully blocked by the present Government involved about ten times as much money as the highly publicised bottom-of-the-harbour schemes that the Australian Labor Party does not seem able to get away from in its discussions, which generally seem to be from the bottom of the gutter.
Claims for tax deductions under tax avoidance schemes that have been closed off by the Federal

Government have totalled about $3,000m in the last few years, with further multimillions of dollars of prospective claims having been wiped out also. The bottom-of-the-harbour tax evasion that was blocked by criminal law in 1980 totalled about $350m. Of course, penalties are to be added to that which also are to be recouped. But that deals with only about one-tenth of the evident avoidance measures that have been blocked by this Federal Government. We would never know that that was the case by listening to anything that comes from the Opposition. I might add that the bottom-of-the-harbour money is now to be recouped under the legislation that is soon to enter this House. It seems to me that it is evident that the only reason for the development of these illegal tax evasion schemes, such as the bottom-of the-harbour schemes, is the outstanding success the Government had in its campaign against illegal tax avoidance that had begun to flourish when, in fact, High Court decisions--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER--Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the House stands adjourned until Tuesday next at 1.45 p.m.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Hunt to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out tbe following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Development ofR.A.A.F Base, Derby, WA., stage I.
Mr Hunt to move-
That, in accordance with tbe provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following elements of the work known as the redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport, remainder of works of phase I, which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament-
( I ) Main aircraft apron;
(2) Buildings and facilities including control tower, administrative area, fire stations, maintenance depot, electricity, water supply and sewerage;
(3) General aviation runway and apron pavements and a general aviation maintenance area, and
(4) Access roads, carparks and landscaping.

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1603 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Ol'erseas Tral'el by Ministers or Ministerial Staff
(Question Nos 3467-3475, 3477-3478, 3481-3485, 3488-3489,3492)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 29 October 1981, in respect of the Ministers mentioned in the respective questions:
(I) On what occasions has the Minister or members of the Minister's staff travelled abroad since I January 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What places and organisations were visited during the travel abroad and on what dates did the Minister depart from Australia and arrive and depart at each of the places visited during travel abroad, and on what date did the Minister and associated staff return to Australia.

(3) What were the names and classifications of persons associated with the Minister's travel abroad referred to in parts (1) and (2).
(4) What sum was spent for each individual in respect of each visit abroad for (a) travel, (b) accommodation, (c) other associated and incidental expenditure and (d) total expenditure.
Mr Newman-The honourable member has asked identical questions of all Ministers as indicated by the above question numbers. The answer is provided on behalf of all Ministers in the table below and incorporates information provided by them. The details are for visits undertaken during the 1981 calendar year, and the costs shown are based on accounts received in my Department as at 30 June 1982. Costs are not separately identifiable for individuals.

MINISTER'S OVERSEAS VISITS-1981

Itinerary Depart

Arrive

Organisations visited/purpose

Accompanying staff

CostS (a) Travel (includes vehicle
hire, etc.) (b) Accomodation and meals
(c) Other associated and incidental expenditure
(d) Total expenditure

Minister ISpouse

Staff

23/6 Sydney 23/6 Tahiti 26/6 Mexico City
2I f97/6WOatsthaiwnagton
2/7 Chicago 8/7 New York 9/7 Columbia
917 Los Angeles 9/7 Honolulu II /7 Sydney

23/6 Tahiti (refuel) 23/6 Mexico City 26/6 Ottawa 29/6 Washington 1/7 Chicago
2/7 New York 817 Columbia 817 Los Angeles
(stopover)
917 Honolulu 10/7 Sydney 11/7 Canberra

Prime Minister (Mr Fraser)

Discussions with Heads of Government of Mexico and Canada. the newly elected US President and the UN. Secretary-General

Professor D. Kemp (Director) Mr D. Budd (Senior Adminis-
trator)
Mr D. Barnett (Press Secretary)
Dr D. White (Senior Adviser) Miss H. McDonald (Assistant
Private Secretary Grade 2) Mrs C. Sande (Assistant Pri-
vate Secretary Grade 2) Miss T. Prior (Assistant Pri-
vate Secretary Grade I) Miss R. Moore (Secretary-
/Typist) Miss J. Suter (Secretary-
/Typist) Dr. J. Ray (Consultant Phys-
ician) Professor J. Rose
(Consultant-joined party in USA)

(a) 251,495 (b) 7.440 (c) 97,300 (d) 356,235

6.491 32.389
3,060 41.940

27/7 Sydney
3/8 London 4/8 New Delhi

28/7 London 4/8 New Delhi 5/8 Sydney

Visit 2
Attend Royal Wedding and discussions with Commonwealth leaders (preparatory to CHOGM). President Mitterand of France, Crown Prince Hassan of Jordan and President Sadat of Egypt

Professor D. Kemp (Director) Mr K. Witney (Senior Admin-
istrator) Mr D. Barnett (Press Sec-
retary) Miss R. Murray (Ministerial
Officer Grade I ) Mrs C. Sande (Assistant Pri-
vate Secretary Grade 2) Miss H. McDonald (Assistant
Private Secretary Grade 2) Miss V. Bond (Assistant Pri-
vate Secretary Grade I) Dr. J. Ray (Consultant Phys-
ician)

(a) 294.860 (b) 6,006 (c) 28,998
(d) 329.864

20.500 17.435 2.210 40.145

1604 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Itinerary Depart
19/1 Sydney 27 / I Tokyo

Arrive
20/1 Tokyo 28/ I Sydney

Organisations visited/purpose

Accompanying staff

Cost $ (a) Travel (includes vehicle
hire, etc.) (b) Accomodation and meals (c) Other associated and
incidental expenditure (d) Total expenditure

Minister jSpouse

Staff

Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony)

Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee Meeting

Mr R. Miller (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 4,700 (b) 2,502 (c) 4,412 (d) 11,614

2,899 962
3,861

14/3 Canberra
15/3 Singapore 17/3 Bahrain 21/3Cairo 23/3 luxor 26/3 Riyadh 26/3 leddah 2Xj3 London
31 !3 Singapore

14/3 Singapore
15/3 Bahrain 17/3 Cairo 21/3 luxor 23/3 Riyadh 26/3 leddah 26/3 london 29/3 Singapore 1/4 Sydney

NB. Travel was by RAAF Boeing 707 aircraft.

Visit 2 Bilateral Ministerial Discussions

Mr L. Bathgate (Journalist GradeA2)
Mr J. Wein (Electorate Secretary)
Dr M. Hayman (Personal Physician)

(a) 184,920 (b) 2,853 (c) 6,112 (d) 193,885

8,148 2,018 2,660 12,826

8/5 Melbourne 8/5 Auckland 13/5 Wellington 13/5 Auckland

8/5 Auckland 8/5 Wellington 13/5 Auckland 13/5 Sydney

Visit 3 Ministerial Discussions

Mr R. Miller (Ministerial

(a) 1,029

Officer, Grade 4A)

(b)

Miss F. Littley (Assistant Pri-

(c)

560

vate Secretary)

(d) 1,589

1,576 1,576

7/6 Sydney
8/6 Auckland 12/6 Buenos Aires 14/6lguacu 16/6 Brasilia
17/6 Manaus 20/6 Rio de Janiero 21/6 Los Angeles 24/6 Honolulu

7/6 Auckland 8/6 Buenos Aires
12/6lguacu 14/6 Brasilia 16/6 Manaus 17/6 Rio de Janeiro 21/6 los Angeles 21/6 Honolulu 25/6 Sydney

Vi.it4 Talks on Trade and Resources

Mr B. Virtue (Ministerial Officer, Grade 5)
Miss A. Daly (Ministerial Officer, Grade 2)

(a) 13,479 (b) 1,314 (c) 3,691 (d) 18,484

12,666 980
13,646

8/8 Canherra 10/8 Vanuatu

8/8 Vanuatu 11/8 Canberra

VisitS

South Pacific Forum

Mr R. Miller (Ministerial

(a) 1,025

69

Officer, Grade 4A)

(b)

501

345

Mrs K. Hurley (Assistant Pri-

(c) 7,757

vate Secretary, Grade 2)

(d) 9,283

414

8/IOCanherra 9/10 Singapore 10/IOCairo 15/IOSeoul 15/10 Manila
26/ II Sydney 29/1 I london 2/12 Brussels 5/12 Madrid 6/12 london 7/12 New York 9/12 Washington 9/12 los Angeles 12/12 Tahiti
16/ I Sydney 22/ I Tokyo 24/1 Rome 28/ I london 31/1 Zurich 3/2 Singapore

8/10 Singapore 9/IOCairo 11/10 Seoul 15/10 Manila 16/10 Sydney
27/11 london 29/ II Brussels 2/12 Madrid 5/12 london 6/12 New York 7/12 Washington 9/12 los Angeles 1O/12Tahiti 13/1 2 Sydney
17/1 Tokyo 23/1 Rome 24/ I london 28/1 Zurich 31/1 Singapore 3/2 Sydney

Visit 6
Ministerial Trade Talks; Funeral of President Sadat

Mr L. Bathgate (Journalist, GradeA2)
Mrs K. Hurley (Assistant Private Secretary, Grade 2)

Visit 7
Australia/European Community Ministerial Discussions

Mr R. Miller (Ministerial Officer, Grade 4A)
Miss C. Stronach (Assistant Private Secretary, Grade 2)

Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch)

Australia-Japan Ministerial Council; Ministerial and industry discussions in UK: lead Australian Delegation to International Business Opportunity Programme, Switzerland

Mr S. McGregor (Senior Pri-
vate Secretary)
Ms C. Price (Assistant Private Secretary)

(a) 227,692

(b)

212

(c) 3,713

(d) 231,617

(a) 12,418 (b) 3,595
(c) 3,851 (d) 19,864

(a) 16,822 (b) 5,017 (c) 5,485 (d) 27,324

5,555 1,191 6,746
12,146 3,361 15,507
12,771 4,603 17,374

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1605

Itinerary
Depart
18/7 Melbourne 21/7 Athens 24/7 London 26/7 Venice 29/7 Malta 3/8 New York 6/8 Los Angeles 11/8 Nairobi 15/8 Singapore
20/1 Sydney 22/1 Toronto 22/1 Ottawa 24/ I Toronto 25/1 Montreal 26/1 Ottawa 27/1 Toronto 28/1 Columbus 30/1 Washington 31/1 New York 6/2 Bangkok
1/11 Sydney 2/ II Port Moresby 3/11 Madang 3/11 Mount Hagen 4/11 Lae 7/ II Port Moresby
19/1 Sydney 23/1 Tokyo

Arrive
19/7 Athens 21/7 London 24/7 Venice 26/7 Malta 29/7 New York 3/8 Los Angeles 7/8 Nairobi 12/8 Singapore 16/8 Melbourne
20/ I Toronto 22/1 Ottawa 22/1 Toronto 24/1 Montreal 26/1 Ottawa 26/1 Toronto 27/1 Columbus, Ohio 28/1 Washington 30/1 New York 2/2 Bangkok 6/2 Sydney
1/II Port Moresby 2/11 Madang 3/ II Mount Hagen 3/11 Lae 4/ II Port Moresby 7/11 Sydney

Organisations
visited/purpose
Visit 2
Ministerial discussions and convey CHOGM invitations; Late extension to lead Australian Delegation at United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy; Diplomatic visit, Malta

Accompanying staff

Cost $ (a) Travel (includes vehicle
hire, etc.) (b) Accomodation and meals (c) Other associated and
incidental expenditure
(d) Total expenditure

Minister jSpouse

Staff

Mr S, McGregor (Senior Private Secretary)
Ms E. Seller (Electorate Secretary)

(a) 28,917 (b) 12,046 (c) 5,669 (d) 46,632

21,380 5,635
27,015

Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair)

Investigate developments in communications techpology

Miss S. Hodgkinson (Ministerial Officer, Grade 3)

(a) 21,815

(b) 3,8146

(c)

594

(d) 26,259

5,772 1,538
7,310

Visil2
Discussions with PNG Ministers and officials on communications matters

Dr. G. Starr (Ministerial Officer, Grade 4A)

(a) 2,371

(b)

206

(c) 2,656

(d) 5,233

1,507 103
1,610

Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Sir John Carrick)

20/1 Tokyo 24/ I Sydney

Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee Meeting

Mr W. Daniels (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

(a) 6,584

(b)

923

(c) 1,852

(d) 9,359

2,485 488
2,973

10/6 Sydney 16/6 Paris 20/6 London
22/6 New Delhi 25/6 Jakarta

11/6 Paris 16/6 London 21/6 New Delhi 23/6 Jakarta 26/6 Sydney

Visit2
Meeting of the International Energy Agency; Ministerial discussions concerning energy

Mr Cadogan-Cowper (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)
Miss H. Hughan (Personal Sec-
retary Grade 2)

(a) 15,953 (b) 3,982 (c) 2,927
(d) 22,862

11,416 2,361
13,777

5/7 Sydney 6/7 Lae

5/7 Lae 7/7 Sydney

Visit 3
Workshop on Energy Planning; Ministerial Discussions

Mr G. Cadogan-Cowper (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

(a) 2,426

(b)

109

(c)

97

(d) 2,632

1,180 352
1,532

18/ I Melbourne 19/1 Sydney 20/1 Hong Kong
23/1 Tokyo 27/1 Peking 27/1 Hong Kong

19/1 Sydney
19/1 Hong Kong 20/1 Tokyo 23/1 Peking 27/1 Hong Kong 28/ I Sydney

Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street)

Australia-lapan Ministerial Committee Meeting; Ministerial Consultations; Official visit to PRC

Mrs S. Kellock (Ministerial Officer Grade 2)
Miss S. Stone (Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2)

(a) 8,288
(b) 1,283
(c) 3,197 (d) 12,768

6,826 1,402
8,228

2/3 Sydney
2/3 Los Angeles 4/3 New York
6/3 Washington
7/3 Detroit 8/3 San Francisco

2/3 Los Angeles
2/3 New York 4/3 Washington 613 Detroit 7/3 San Francisco 10/3 Sydney

Visit 2
Ministerial Consultations in United States and Canada

Mr R. Gordon (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

(a) 6,158

(b) 1,741

(c)

220

(d) 8,119

4,754 828
5,582

1606 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Itinerary
Depart
6/6 Melbourne 9/6 Singapore 14/6 London 17/6 Paris 17/6 Frankfurt 20/6 Manila 24/6 Wellington
26/6 Sydney 28/6 New York 28/6 Toronto 29/6 Ottowa 1/7 Washington 8/7 San Diego 16/7 New York
31/7 Sydney 4/8 Port Moresby 6/8 Honiara 13/8 Vanuatu 13/8 Noumea
18/9 Sydn<y 23/9 New York 23/9 Los Angeles
20/11 Sydney 20/11 Los Angeles 24/11 New York 25/11 Frankfurt 27/11 Warsaw 29/11 Paris 2/12 Brussels 4/12 Amsterdam 4/12 Dusseldorf 9/12 Cologne 9/12 Frankfurt 12/12 Singapore
19/1 Sydney 26/1 Tokyo
9/2 Melbourne 10/2 Bangkok 15/2 Dacca 18/2 Katmandu 18/2 Bangkok 19/2 Singapore
16/5 Melbourne 19/5 San Francisco 21/5Washington 24/5 London 28/5 Belgrade 28/5 Rome 31/5 Venice 31/5 Frankfurt 6/6 Shanghai 8/6 Hong Kong

Arrive
6/6 Singapore 10/6 London 14/6 Paris 17/6 Frankfurt 18/6 Manila 21/6 Wellington 24/6 Sydney
26/6 New York 28/6 Toronto 28/6 Ottowa 29/6 Washington 1/7 San Diego 8/7 New York 18/7 Sydney
31/7 Port Moresby 4/8 Honiara 6/8 Vanuatu 13/8 Noumea 13/8 Sydney
18/9 New York 23/9 Los Angeles 25/9 Sydney
20/11 Los Angeles 21/11 New York 25/11 Frankfurt 25/11 Warsaw 27/11 Paris 29/11 Brussels 2/12 Amsterdam 4/ 12 Dusseldorf 4/12 Cologne 9/12 Frankfurt 10/12 Singapore 13/12 Melbourne
20/1 Tokyo 27/1 Sydney
10/2 Bangkok 10/2 Dacca 15/2 Katmandu 18/2 Bangkok 18/2 Singapore 20/2 Melbourne
16/5 San Francisco 19/5 Washington 22/5 London 24/5 Belgrade 28/5 Rome 28/5 Venice 31/5 Frankfurt 1/6 Peking 6/6 Hong Kong 9/6 Sydney

Organisations
visited/purpose
Visit 3
Ministerial Consultations in Singapore, UK and France; OECD Meeting in France; European Heads of Mission Meeting in France; PostASEAN Foreign Ministers' Meeting; ANZUS Council Meeting

Accompanying staff

Cost $ (a) Travel (includes vehicle
hire, etc.) (b) A\,;comodation and meals
(c) Other associated and incidental expenditure
(d) Total expenditure

Minister jSpouse

Staff

Mr T. O'Loughlin (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)
Miss L. Sciberras (Steno-
Secretary Grade I)

(a) 8,134 (b) 1,788 (c) 2,524 (d) 12,446

2,676 1,403
4,079

Visit 4
Accompanied Prime Minister on official visits to Canada and United States; UN Conference on Kampuchea; Ministerial Consultations

Mr R. Gordon (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)
Miss S. Stone (Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2)

(a) 13,882

(b) 6,575

(c)

707

(d) 21,164

11,324 4,377
15,701

VisitS
Official visits to PNG and Solomon Islands; South Pacific Forum; South Pacific Heads of Mission Meeting

Mrs S. Kellock (Ministerial Officer Grade 2)
Mrs N. Fraser (Steno-
Secretary Grade 1)

(a) 2,953 (b) 3,183 (c) 4,598 (d) 10,734

Visit 6
United Nations General Assembly; Ministerial Consultations

Mr R. Gordon (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

Visit 7
UN discJ.lssions on global negotiations; Official visit to Poland, FRG and the Netherlands; Australia/EC Ministerial Meeting; East European Heads of Mission Meeting; Ministerial Consultations in Singapore

Mr R. Gordon (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)
Miss S. Stone (Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2)

(a) 6,194

(b) 1,528

(c)

63

(d) 7,785

(a) 17,126 (b) 5,377
(c) 3,157 (d) 25,660

3,667 772
4,439
4,546 . 1,024 5,570
12,131 7,150 19,281

Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon)

Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee Meeting

Mr P. Davey (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

Visill
Commonwealth Agricultural Ministers' Meeting

Mrs D. McCabe (Ministerial Officer Grade 3)

(a) 4,660 (b) 1,617 (c) 2,488 (d) 8,765
(a) 6,771 (b) 1,036 (c) 1,037 (d) 8,844

2,974 821
3,795
2,892 210
3,102

Visil3
World Food Council~ 7th Ministerial Session

Mrs R. Ryan (Ministerial _ Officer Grade 1)

(a) 14,979 (b) 3,915 (c) 2,466 (d) 21,360

5,723 1,171
6,894

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1607

Itinerary
Depart
24/9 Sydney 24/9 San Francisco 27/9 Denver 27/9 Washington 1/10 London 2/10 Brussels 4/10 Anchorage 8/IOTokyo

Arrive
24/9 San Francisco 24/9 Denver 27/9 Washington 30/9 London 1/10 Brussels 2/10 Anchorage 5/10 Tokyo 9/10 Sydney

Organisations visited/purpose
Visit 4 Ministerial discussions concern~
ing Australian meat exports

Accompanying staff

Cost $ (a) Travel (includes vehicle
hire,etc.) (b) Accnmodation and meals (c) Other associated and
incidental expenditure (d) Total expenditure

Minister/Spouse

Staff

Mr P. Davey (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

(a) 8,326

(b) 2,908

(c)

882

(d) 12,116

6,701 921
7,622

11/12Sydney
15/12 Tokyo 16/12Seoul 17/12 Tokyo

12/12Tokyo 15/12 Seoul 16/12 Tokyo 18/12 Brisbane

VisitS
Ministerial discussions concetning Australian beef exports

Mr P. Davey (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

(a) 3,546

(b) 1,254

(c)

829

(d) 5,629

3,182 434
3,616

19/9 Sydney 24/9 Nassau 28/9 Washington

20/9 Nassau 24/9 Washington 30/9 Sydney

Treasurer (Mr Howard)
Commonwealth Finance Ministerst Meeting, Bahamas; International Monetary Fund Meeting. Washington

Professor J. Hewson (Consultant)
Miss c.. Sellman (Steno-
Secretary Grade I)

(a) 6,698

(b) 1,133

(c)

259

(d) 8,090

9,181 1,503
10,684

4/2 Sydney 5/2 Auckland
7/2 Waitangi 7/2 Auckland

4/2 Auckland 5/2 Waitangi
7/2 Auckland 7/2 Brisbane

Minister for Defence (Mr Killen)

ANZ Consultative Committee Mr B. Smith (Ministerial (a) 1,581

843

Ministerial Meeting

Officer Grade 3)

(b)

(c)

139

(d) 1,720

843

21/5 Sydney 22/5 Athens 24/5Chanea 26/5 Athens 29/5 London 30/5 Paris 30/5 London 2/6 Kuala Lumpur
3/6 Singapore

22/5 Athens 22/5 Chanea 24/5 Athens 26/5 London 29/5 Paris 30/5 London 31/5 Kuala Lumpur
2/6 Singapore 4/6 Sydney

Visit 1
40th Anniversary of the Battle of Crete; Ministerial Discussions

Mr B. Smith (Ministerial Officer Grade 3)

(a) 14,017 (b) 2,840 (c) 1,290 (d) 18,147

5,538 872
6,410

Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle) Nil. See House of Representatives Hansard, 30.10.81., page 2830

31/5 Canberra 1/6 Singapore 2/6 London 4/6 Paris 10/6 Geneva 10/6 Zurich 10/6 Vienna 15/6 Nairobi 15/6 Kampala 16/6 Nairobi 17/6 Lagos 18/6 London

31/5 Singapore 2/6 London 2/6 Paris 4/6 Geneva 10/6 Zurich 10/6 Vienna 11/6 Nairobi 15/6 Kampala 15/6 Nairobi
16/6 Lagos 18/6 London 20/6 Perth

Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner)

OECD; International Labour Or-
ganisation; convey CHOGM invitations

Mr R. Hogan (Ministerial Officer Grade 4A)

(a) 6,407 (b) 3,665 (c) 4,420 (d) 14,492

4,993 1,228
6,221

6/8 Sydney 7/8 San Francisco 12/8 New Orleans 13/8 Los Angeles

6/8 San Francisco 8/8 New Orleans 12/8 Los Angeles 15/8 Sydney

Attorney-General (Senator Durack)

American Bar Association; discussions with US Attorney General and other officials

Miss C. McLure (Ministerial Officer Grade 3)

(a) 4,717

(b)

337

(c)

397

(d) 5,451

4,381 607
4,988

23/10 Perth 1/11 London 3/11 Paris 13/11 Madrid

24/10 London 1/11 Paris
3/11 Madrid 15/ II Melbourne

Visill
International Law Conference. Madrid; discussions with UK and French officials

Miss J. Griggs (Personal Secretary Grade 2)

(a) 14,520

(b) 2,787

(c)

268

(d) 17,575

6,105 1,815
7,920

Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) Nil. See House of Representatives Hansard, 18.11.81 .. page 3153

1608 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Question.s

Itinerary Depart

Arrive

Organisations visited/purpose

Accompanying staff

Minister for Education (Mr Fife) Nil. See House of Representatives Hansard. 18.11.81., page 3188

Cost $
(a) Travel (includes vehicle hire,etc.)
(b) Accomodation and meals (c) Other associated and
incidental expenditure (d) Total expenditure

Minister/Spouse

Staff

12/6 Sydney 18/6 London 23/6 Washington 24/6 New York 25 /6 Toulouse
30/6 Mahe 1/7 Salisbury 5/7 Lusaka 8/7 Dar-es-Salaam
8/7 Blantyre 10/7 London

13/6 London 18/6 Washington 23/6 New York 25/6 Toulouse 27/6 Mahe
(Seychelles)
30/6 Salisbury 1/7 Lusaka 5/7 Dar-es-Salaam 8/7 Blantyre
(Malawi)
10/7 London 12/7 Sydney

Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt)

Discussions with Ministers and officials on transport matters; convey CHOGM invitations; 5th International Dar-esSalaam Trade Fair

Mr F. Jennings (Ministrial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 17,926

(b) 5,236

(c)

674

(d) 23,836

8,440 2,108
10,548

16/9 Sydney 19/9 Manila 21/9Tokyo 24/9 Seoul 3/10 Peking 4/10 Hong Kong
4/10 Singapore

16/9 Manila 19/9 Tokyo 21/9 Seoul 24/9 Peking 3/10 Hong Kong 4/10 Singapore 5/10 Sydney

Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar)

Bilaterial Discussions

Mr J. Short (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 5,797 (b) 1,325
(c) 1,895 (d) 9,017

4,432 619
5,051

12/4 Sydney 13/4 Auckland 13/4 Hamilton 16/4 Wellington 16/4 Auckland

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee)

12/4 Auckland 13/4 Hamilton 13/4 Wellington 16/4 Auckland 16/4 Melbourne

Meeting of State and Federal ImMrs L. Newson (Electorate

(a) 1,118

765

migration Ministers

Secretary)

(b)

493

196

(c)

243

(d) 1,854

961

6/6 Melbourne 10/6 Kuala Lumpur 14/6 Bangkok 16/6 Dacca 18/6 New Delhi 20/6 Colombo 21/6 Bahrain 21/6 London 23/6 Geneva 25/6 Cologne
3/7 London 7/7 Hong Kong

6/6 Kuala Lumpur 10/6 Bangkok 14/6 Dacca 16/6 New Delhi
18/6 Colombo 21/6 Bahrain 21/6 London 21/6Geneva 23/6 Cologne 25/6 London
4/7 Hong Kong 8/7 Sydney

Visit 2
Observe refugee operations in S.E. Asia; promote migration of skilled tradespeople to Australia; discussions with UNHCR; convey CHOOM invitations

Mr R. Palfreyman (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 7,558 (b) 7,311 (c) 1,867 (d) 16,736

4,575 1,866
6,441

24/ I Melbourne 27/1 Christchurch
29/1 Antarctica 30/1 Christchurch 31/1 Auckland

24/1 Christchurch 27/1 Antarctica 29/1 Christchurch 30/1 Auckland 31/1 Brisbane

Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson)
Visit Australian Antarctic lnstalNil lations with Public Works Committee

(a) 1,066

(b)

241

(c)

30

(d) 1,337

13/3Sydney 14/3 Singapore 17/3 London 20/3 Paris 26/3 Salisbury 30/3 London 1/4 Montreal
2/4 Honolulu

13/3 Singapore
15/3 London 17/3 Paris 21/3 Salisbury 27/3 London 30/3 Montreal 1/4 Honolulu 4/4 Sydney

Visit 2
CSTP Ministerial Meeting; Ministerial Discussions

Miss M. Benedetti (StenoSecretary Grade 1)

(a) 21,089 (b) 5,549 (c) 1,184 (d) 27,822

8,305 2,619
10,924

° 23/ I Launceston
24/ 10 Brisbane 2/11 Port Vila
5/11 Noumea

° 23/ I Brisbane
24/10 Port Vila 2/11 Noumea 5/11 Sydney

Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman)

South Pacific Conference

Miss M. McFadden (Personal Secretary Grade 2)

(a) 3,407

(b) 1,392

(c)

183

(d) 4,982

818 1,154
1,972

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1609

Itinerary Depart

Arrive

Organisations visited/purpose

Accompanying staff

Cost $ (a) Travel (includes vehicle
hire, etc.) (b) Accomodation and meals
(c) Other associated and incidental expenditure
(d) Total expenditure

Minister /Spouse

Staff

9/7 Townsville 9/7 Honiara 15/7 Tarawa
15/7 Honiara

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown)

9/7 Honiara 9/7 Tarawa 15/7 Honiara
15/7 Townsville

South Pacific Labour Ministers' Mr P. Paget (Ministerial

(a)

141

275

Conference

Officer Grade 4)

(b)

327

260

(c)

870

(d) 1.338

535

9/3 Sydney 14/3 Bangkok 14/3 Singapore

9/3 Bangkok 14/3 Singapore 15/3 Sydney

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore)

Meeting of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific

Mr D. Ford (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 5,600

(b) 1,125

(c)

674

(d) 7,399

2,533 719
3,252

28/6 Sydney 3/7 Madang

28/6 Madang 3/7 Sydney

Minister for the Capital Territory (Mf Hodgman)

Meeting of Australian Environment Council and the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers

Mr J. Chilcott (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a)

982

(b)

325

(c)

89

(d) 1,396

673 344
1,017

12/9 Melbourne 14/9 Wellington

12/9 Wellington 14/9 Sydney

Vi.it2
Launch tourist campaignCanberra/Wellington National Capitals

Mr M. Slugocki (Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2)

(a) 1,120

(b)

291

(c)

681

(d) 2,092

866 286
1,152

28/4 Sydney 2/5 Honolulu

28/4 Honolulu 4/5 Sydney

Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner)

Annual General Meeting of Asian Development Bank (in place of Treasurer)

Mr N. Heath (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 3,620

(b) 1,125

(c)

742

(d) 5,487

3,303 490
3,793

15/5Sydney 18/5 Paris 22/5 Libreville 23/5 Paris

16/5 Paris 18/5 Libreville
23/5 Paris 25/5 Sydney

Visit 2
Deputize for Treasurer at International Monetary Fund meetings

Mr N. Heath (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 10,051

(b)

579

(c) 1,089

(d) 11,719

9,202 220
9,422

14/6 Sydney 15/6 Honolulu 17/6 Los Angeles 21/6 Washington
24/6 New York 25/6 Atlanta 26/6 Washington 29/6 New Orleans 30/6 San Antonio 1/7 Los Angeles

14/6 Honolulu 15/6 Los Angeles 17/6 Washington 21/6 New York
24/6 Atlanta 25/6 Washington 26/6 New Orleans 29/6 San Antonio 30/6 Los Angeles 3(7 Sydney

Visit 3
Fact-finding trip on veterans' affairs-including Agent Orange question

Mr N. Heath (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 11,766

(b) 3,751

(c)

781

(d) 16,298

7,049 3,246
10,295

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Baume) Nil. See House of Representatives Hansard-.9.3.82 .- page 772

1/IOSydney 5/10 Bagdad 11/10 Penang 14/10 Kuala Lumpur
16/10 Jakarta

3/10 Bagdad 9/IOPenang 11/IOKuala Lumpur
14/IOJakarta 17/10 Sydney

Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh)

Officiate at Australia's National Day at Bagdad International Fair; Ministerial Meeting of International Tin Agreement
Member Countries

Mr L. Pincott (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a) 7,469 (b) 1,786 (c) 1,629 (d) 10,884

3,904 949
4,853

28/6 Sydney 28/6 Port Moresby 2(7 Madang
2/' Port Moresby

Minister for Home Affairs and the En\'ironment (Mr Wilson)

28/6 Port Moresby 28/6 Madang 2/7 Port Moresby
2/7 Sydney

Meeting of the Australian Environment Council and the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers

Mr G. Dempster (Ministerial Officer Grade 4)

(a)

865

(b)

806

(c)

69

(d) 1,740

1,338 585
1,923

Rate of Growtb of Money Supply
(Question No. 4046)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) Why has the Reserve Bank stopped publishing figures for the measures of rate of growth of the money supply. M I,

M2 and M3, over the most recent 3 months on an annualised basis.
(2) What has been the rate of growth of seasonally adjusted M I, M2 and M3 over the previous 3 months on an annualised basis in each month since January 1980.

1610 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Reserve Bank published figures for M I, M2 and M3 on an actual and seasonally adjusted basis in its monthly press release and in the monthly Reserve Bank Bulletin. In the text accompanying the press release, the Reserve Bank no longer includes three-monthly growth rates at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. I understand that the Bank discontinued the listing of these figures because the series was influenced by short term random movements and because of doubts about the reliability of the seasonal adjustment factors.
(2) The table below is provided in response to part 2 of the question.
GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES'
(in the three months ending the month shown, seasonally adjusted annual rate)

MI

M2

M3

1980January
February March
April May
June July August
September October November
December 1981-
January February
March April May June July August September October November December 1982January

18.8 25.3 17.3

17.9 19.6 15.0

20.4 16.8 13.4

3.1

6.2

7.5

7.8 12.3 10.3

9.9 19.7 13.8

19.5 28.6 18.2

17.9 22.7 15.5

15.9 14.7 12.0

18.5 10.3 10.3

25.7 11.1 11.4

19.0

8.6 Il.l

10.9

8.6 11.0

-4.7

3.7

7.1

1.1 10.7

9.8

-1.7 12.9

9.6

12.0 27.2 17.6

12.8 27.3 17.8

19.8 24.8 16.8

10.4 12.1

9.2

3.3

9.1

6.3

5.2 12.6

8.7

2.0 11.7

9.2

2.7

7.4

9.1

1.8

2.4

7.4

- These growth rates are based on the latest figures, namely, those in the February 1981 Reserve Bank Bulletin. There have been some slight revisions to the last three months' figures shown in the Volume of Money Press Release of 26 February 1982.
Importation of Harp Seal Products
(Question No. 4193)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
Further to the Prime Minister's statement (Hansard. 4 April 1979, pages 1481-2) that the Government's decision to repeal the Whaling Act 1960 represented a change in policy from one of conservative utilisation of whale stocks controlled by international agreement to one committed to a vigorous and active policy of protection of whales and that as satisfactory substitutes were readily available for nearly all whale products, the importation into Australia of all whale products and goods containing them was to be banned from I January

1981, will he (a) advise the Canadian Government that he also vigorously and actively supports a policy of protection of the harp seal, currently being slaughtered in Canada and (b) introduce legislation which will ban the importation into Australia of all harp seal products, given that there are also satisfactory substitutes readily available for nearly all harp seal products.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In view of the many representations and petitions received by the Government concerning the seal hunt in Canada. Australia has taken the opportunity on several recent occasions to raise this issue with Canada at Ministerial level.
There is disagreement about important scientific aspects of the seal population assesssment and, therefore, Canada and the European Commission have agreed that a special study be carried out by the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas (ICES) on the effect of the hunt on the survival of the two seal species involved. ICES is expected to present its findings in October this year. Australia has been invited to send an observer to the meeting at which the findings will be presented.
Following the conclusion of the ICES report, the Government will consider whether any further action by Australia is appropriate.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 4409)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nilture of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operational of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question IS as follows:
(a) All supervisors and operators of visual display units and screen based equipment have been notified individually of the need for adequate rest relief breaks. The operating arrangements in areas where screen based operators are employed are such that staff become involved in substantially different activities throughout the working day.
(b) (i) Operators are expected to spend between 60 per cent and 80 per cent of their working day on operating duties.
(ii) Operators spend between 20 per cent and 40 per cent of their working day on other duties.
(c) (i) No daily production standard has been established due to the variable nature of the workload-both in volume and content.
(ii) Statistics on completed keystrokes are not maintained.

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1611

Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Finance
(Question No. 4412)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction-
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment'?
(b) What percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties?
(c) How many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete?
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) The screen based equipment working environment and other issues related to visual display unit operation, including issues raised in Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 are at present under review within the Department. Practices in relation to rest breaks and the mix of duties vary with the nature of particular screen-based operations but staff and operators have been made aware of the need for adequate breaks and work flows are planned to allow for this.
(b) (i) and (ii) Depending on the nature of the operation officers may spend a few minutes or up to 75 per cent of their working day on operating duties. The remainder of their working day is spent on other duties.
(c) (i) and (ii) There is no specific keystroke target set for operators nor are individual performance records maintained. Based on aggregate keystroke records, data processing operators average betweend 70,000 and 75,000 keystrokes per day.
Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations
(Question No. 4479)
[This answer corrects the answer previously given. (Hansard, 18 August 1982, page 567)]
Mr West asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) How many convictions have there been for violations of the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations since 1976.
(2) What fines and/or prison sentences have been imposed resulting from these convictions.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations, which came into force on 27 October 1976 and were amended on I September 1981 impose certain prohibitions on importation into, or exportation from, Australia of specimens of certain species of wild fauna.
Actions which contravene any of these Regulations are dealt with as offences against section 233 of the Customs Act

1901 which establishes as offences, the importation into Australia of prohibited imports or the exportation from Australia of prohibited exports.
Since 1976 there have been 13 convictions, with penalties totalling $7,210 in respect of fauna covered by the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations.
Rebuilding of National Institute of Dramatic Art and Australian Film and Television School
(Question No. 4586)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
( I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy speech on 30 September 1980, promise to fully fund the rebuilding, in Sydney, of the National Institute of Dramatic Art and the Australian Film and Television School.
(2) If so, what was the appropriation and funding for these rebuilding programs in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) National Institute of Dramatic Art: No appropriation was made in 1980-81 or 1981-82 for the permanent home. On I August 1982 I announced the Government's decision to provide $4.2m for the construction of a permanent building for NIDA at the University of New South Wales, with $100,000 to be provided in 1982-83.
Australian Film and Television School: Appropriation was (a) Nil in 1980-81 and (b) $500,000 in 1981-82, of which $195,000 was postponed for expenditure in 1982-83 in accordance with the Government's decision to restrain expenditure. Estimated expenditure on the project for 1982-83 is $595,000.
Aboriginal Rights in Queensland
(Question No. 4682)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What steps will be taken by the Government, before the Commonwealth Games in Brisbane, to guarantee to Queensland indigenes that they will be given land rights, award wages, rights of peaceful protest, rights of co-operative or corporate purchase, leasehold of pastoral and other land and of housing on Aboriginal reserves, not inferior to similar rights in the Northern Territory and South Australia and to the rights of foreign landholders in Queensland, and the rights proposed and/or ostensibly guaranteed by Federal laws concerning Aboriginal reserves and racial discrimination.
(2) If no such guarantees are given, is he able to say whether the extraordinary police powers legislated for in the vicinity of the Games are likely to exacerbate the tendency of police to discriminate unfairly against Aborigines as reported in parliamentary inquiries, and are likely to result in unnecessary violence.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Senator Baume outlined the Commonwealth Government's position in relation to the future of Aboriginal and Island reserves in Queensland in a statement to the Senate on 4 May 1982 (Hansard pages 1780-1783).
In a Press statement on 27 August, I reaffirmed the Commonwealth Government's unequivocal commitment to guarantee the stated intent of the Queensland Government to

1612 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

provide security of tenure and maintain the integrity of the reserve boundaries. If there are actions which transgress these principles, or which indicate an unreasonable use of the discretions in the legislation, the Commonwealth will act accordingly.
(2) I am not prepared to speculate about future events.
Agricultural Chemicals: Export
(Question No. 4708)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) What (a) intermediate (technical) and (b) final product agricultural chemicals are exported from Australia, (i) by which companies and (ii) to what destinations, for each year since 1970-71 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.

(2) What has been the (a) monetary value, in 1982 prices, and (b) quantity of each product exported for the period referred to in part (I).
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Information is not available on exports of particular chemicals to be used for agricultural purposes. Statistics of exports of manufactured fertilisers; of disinfectants, pesticides, fungicides and the like; and of medicaments for veterinary use in the years 1971-72 to 1980-81 are set out in Tables I, 2 and 3 below, in each case indicating export values to specified destinations. Comparable statistics for 1970-71 are not readily available. The statistical data does not record the names of the companies involved in these exports.
(2) There is no suitable export price index that may be employed to convert the export values in Tables I, 2 and 3 to constant 1982 prices. Exports of the goods included in the tables are recorded as to value, but not according to units of quantity.

Table I AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURED FERTILIZERS
($) f.o.b. (SITC 561 and 562)

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Bangladesh Brazil Christmas Island Fiji Hong Kong Indonesia Japan Jordan Malaysia New Caledonia New Zealand Norfolk Island Papua-New Guinea Philippines Qatar Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Taiwan Province Thailand USA. Western Samoa Other Countries
Total

14,651 219
881,919 2,961
12,033
56,422 1,926
51,016 76,055
549 6,904 4,230 73,236
1,994 135,820
7,054

225,140 250
19,001 1,866
516,379 9,940
74,721 16
75,091 173
146,273 174,408
485 331,880
3,513 27
8,982
1,055 22,286

101,946 252
639,494 2,700 782 150
91,416 739
109,103 835,902
1,760 149,935
6,814 144
13,840 19,940
25
44,969

"
147 36,500
878 1,996,376
1,694
21,243 62,657 145,009
2,453 73,521 433,209
2,758 6,532
362
161 5,285

1,114,700 446,154
6,355 137 4
2,077 1,123 392,731 24,484 156,541 3,830 48,624 8,240
875 6,201 6,501 628,148 693,518
2,290 3,126 21,039

1,326,989 1,611,486 1,928,911 2,788,785 3,566,698

434 8,100
476
404 172,042
915 108,047
1,535 8,745
26 136
142
207 4,087
305,296

600

864 6,021 4,064 19,367 2,723 4,168 1,843 2,482 666,336 2,031 83,421
3,274 5,780
1,701 4,000 15,831 20,659

1,126 71,174
3,500 2,681 3,250 4,620 75,385 1,583 1,062,747
680 671,730
594 9,424 4,294 37,496
1,000 344
21,509 13,435

302 132,045
6,843 1,312,280
11,872 4,951 19,919 2,460,419 1,444 1,241,856 142,627 5,136 25,011 56,890 2,914
7,242 19,324
34,480

1,875 304,791
8,970 11,866
2,024 42,427 3,778,290
964 612,438
72,178 5,364 1,230
291,189 8,692 708 8,622 3,336 1,129
72,250

844,565 1,986,572 5,486,155 5,228,351

Source: Compiled from information supplied by ABS.
Table 2 AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS OF DISINFECTANTS, PESTICIDES, FUNGICIDES ETC.
($) f.o.b. (SITC 591 and 599.20)

Christmas Island Fiji
France Germany, FR Hong Kong Indonesia Malaysia
Nauru Rep.
Netherlands

1971-72
1,525 74,192
4,043
4,278 21,932 152,746
5,801

1972-73
778 72,166
409,324 9,771
206,381 40,918

1973-74
132,936
6,304 31,469 169,873 15,517
2,465

1974-75
3,590 276,748
2,707
7,022 123,246 447,101 41,106
17,000

1975-76
7,510 151,757
5,034 78,455 19,520 693,592 703,815 13,915

1976-77 1977-78

9,509 138,708 36,124 111,121 54,725 940,896 789,162
1,180 74,502

4,212 257,631
46,557
236,310 1,008,670
771,120 30,801 22,773

1978-79
16,067 340,754 41,803
18,930 146,662 593,754 136,178 29,760

1979-80
22,329 427,972
60,363 35,509 110,050 361,258 237,076 15,943 4,059

1980-81
24,884 424,708
57,728 297,039 193,904
54,358 232,044
51,614

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1613

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

New Caledonia New Zealand Papua-New Guinea Philippines Polynesia, French Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Switzerland Taiwan Province Thailand Tonga UK. USA.
Vanuatu Western Samoa
Other Countries

10,534 855,566 290,046
12,894 4,351 17,524 7,610 38,337 134,861
34,166 7,470
396 5,309 23,997 16,213 24,020

5,131 359,320 243,198
8,261 5,080 97,622 22,634 5,515 90,342
139 14,896
8,621
12,512 32,349 9,015 67,899

21,916 703,680 227,897
4,996 1,627 182,806 39,532 8,733
170 8,194 68,914
8,341 1,113 1,155 45,199 5,705 34,365

25,418 651,194 397,134
30,761 14,767 301,516 78,786 22,393
858 129 198,330 13,799 660 12,712 54,613 78,591 375,362

46,898 542,123 345,647 28,733
5,770 402,262 62,456
46,873 48,901
3,660 135,574
6,685 126,898 34,202 36,358 66,477 167,506

27,483 1,005,363
355,741 72,056 23,470 465,917 126,950
8,555 15,486
125,997 6,728 12,321 19 28,141 8,952
108,129

84,058 1,000,432
558,184 130,833 24,693 299,664 59,443 29,931 20,102 48,783 128,922
7,775 44,410
4,274 17,829 28,907 292,300

118,829 1,205,329
942,092 86,775 20,260 241,846 49,005 74,487 77,105 23,293 145,477
9,152 43,519
4,758 25,602 169,706 146,870

139,597 1,341,599 1,507,211
86,641 75,088 536,355 82,090 87,869 21,175
121,790 6,512
188,626 96,228 29,476 244,155 224,949

122,481 1,850,577 1,571,191
96,703 39,500 611.333 172,727 37,777 41,244 13,718 276,570
9,222 31,485 123,126 22,286 102,063 76,298

Total

1,747,811 1,721,872 1,722,907 3,175,543 3,780,621 4,547,235 5,158,614 4,708,013 6,063,920 6,534,580

Source: Compiled from information supplied by ABS.
Table 3 AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS OF MEDICAMENTS FOR VETERINARY USE ONLY
($) f.o.b. (SITC 541.71.01, 72.01, 73.01, 79.01 and 541.70.01)

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Fiji France Germany, FR
Hong Kong Indonesia Japan
Kenya Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Papua-New Guinea
Philippines Singapore South Africa Sri Lanka
Thailand Taiwan Province UK. USA.
Zambia Other Countries

7,730 4,066
111,706 2,444 8,420 8,809
113,579 87,589 2,766,602 12,827 48,261 81,211
2,677 7,652 6,060
19,976 90,194
1,198 54,223

4,847 4,000
354 130,255
168 16,885 52,742 105,974 14,218 3,833,070 12,453 28,076 200,665 31,088 30,582 24,075 2,760
3,463 103,798
4,875 90,738

7,446
20,472 67,651
4,776 18,793 32,137 100,770 226,320 3,608,037 15,827 28,354 147,983 10,572 11,060 33,140
58,473 67,080
6,120 122,884

6,646 54,891 32,694 144,084
2,696 13,519 46,404 272,709 492,149 1,276,921 44,330 48,695 238,289 94,135
116,625
78,507 9,390 3,564 83,219

9,147 47,995 11,373 53,585
7,551 13,107 9,900 196,677 136,370 1,183,324 17,065 70,194 142,280 10,504 10,923 40,195
1,980 42,554 50,235
5,889 '70,629

6,600 33,077 4,204 122,222 27,030 32,894 73,506 168,266 226,582 1,820,944 62,606 37,125 67,036 26,211 5,930 129,747
234 150,594
16,670 13,684 116,372

5,144 13,258
1,933 132,618 27,390 26,312 36,951 95,908 66,575 2,468,298 30,036 55,979 58,101 165,602 24,100 144,309
1,844 10,221 9,726 39,775 63,659

4,880
40,711 352,055
9,996 46,819 29,421 60,489
3,590,514 76,116 88,048 28,657
279,839 806
29,866 12,304 61,883 24,514 41,827 360,632

4,777 87,567 28,814 249,034 35,685 30,773 33,777 79,232 23,702 4,594,529 94,288 100,828 17,007 10,328
2,143 74,633 34,746 185,081 28,007 14,153 281.345

13,254
575,919 20,415 31,040 10,894 83,081 167,975 4,412,335 145,265 121,062 61,875 108,985
315 84,312 93,411 15,575 63,554
5,164 548,839

Total

3,435,224 4,695,086 4,587,895 3,059,467 2,131,477 3,141,534 3,477,739 5,139,377 6,010,449 6,563,270

Source: Compiled from information supplied by ABS.
Federal Elections: Cost
(Question No. 4736)

(2) What wage is currently paid to casual employees who act as polling officials on polling days.

Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What was the overall cost to the Australian Electoral Office of conducting each Federal election since I January 1972.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 1972-$1,980,000 (House of Representatives only). 1974-$4,603,000 (House of Representatives and full Senate). 1975-$6,167,000 (House of Representatives and full Senate). 1977-$9,050,000 (House of Representatives and half Senate). 1980-$12,448,000 (House of Representatives and half Senate). (These figures do not include the salaries of permanent staff.)

1614 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

(2)-

POLLING OFFICIALS' RATES OF REMUNERAnON

Polling official

Engaged Not engaged Extra hours (rate per hour)

at scrutiny at scrutiny

15 hours

13 hours Polling day

Sunday

Assistant Returning Officer in Charge of booth
containing: (a) I table only (b) 2 or 3 tables
(c) 40r 5 tables (d) 6 or 7 tables (e) 8 or 9 tables
(f) 10 or more tables Presiding Officer in charge of booth containing:
(a) I table only
(b) 2 or 3 tables (c) 4 or more tables
Assistant Presiding Officer
Poll Clerk Special Poll Clerk (2+ hours)
Doorkeeper ( lOt hours)

$
140.40 144.40 149.40 153.90 158.40 162.90
128.20 132.30 136.30 110.80 103.30 17.20

$
111.10 114.60 118.10 96.00 89.50 79.00

$
13.20 13.20 13.20 13.20 13.20 13.20
11.50 11.50 11.50 9.60 9.00 9.00

$
17.60 17.60 17.60 17.60 17.60 17.60
15.30 15.30 15.30 12.80 12.00 12.0()'

Other
$
10.10 10.10 10.10 10.10 10.10 10.10
8.80 8.80 8.80 7.40 6.90 6.90

Australian Electoral Office: On-Line Electoral Roll Maintenance Network
(Question No. 4740)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) How many (a) Divisional and (b) State Offices have been linked to the Central Office of the Australian Electoral Office by the on-line electoral roll maintenance network.
(2) When is it expected that all Divisional and State Offices will be linked with Central Office.

Aborigines: Housing Loans
(Question No. 4747)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
How many persons are currently on the Aboriginal Development Commission's housing loans waiting list.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Aboriginal Development Commission informs me that there were 1,950 families on the housing loans waiting list as at I September 1982.

(3) What is the make of the computer concerned.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Chief Australian Electoral Officer has advised that his Office does not have an on-line electoral roll maintenance system. Roll maintenance is perform.!d through the batch processing method at the Department of Administrative Services' computer centre Canberra. A team of officers from the Australian Electoral Office and the Department of Administrative Services has completed a comprehensive study of the Office's information requirements. The results of this study are now being used by the team to design new ADP systems which will meet the major information and data processing needs of the Australian Electoral Office. The design is expected to include an on-line network connecting all Divisional Offices, Head Offices and Central Office with computer systems to support roll maintenance, polling results collation and distribution, election arrangements, employment of polling officials and provision of management information. Current expectations are that all Divisional Offices, State Offices and Central Office will have terminals connected to such a computer network within the next three to five years. (3) The computer network requirements of the Australian Electoral Office are still being assessed and therefore the type of computer equipment required is not yet known.

Commonwealth Parliament Elections and By-elections: Cost
(Question No. 4834)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

What has been the cost incurred by the Australian Elec-
toral Office for the purpose of conducting general elections and by-elections for the Commonwealth Parliament in each of the last 5 years.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1977 General election 1978 By-election (Werriwa NSW) 1979 By-election (Grayndler NSW) 1980 General election 1981 By-elections (Wentworth, NSW,
McPherson Queensland, Boothby SA, Curtin WA) . . . . . . 1982 By-election (Lowe NSW)

$ 9,050,000
61,000 99,000 12,448,000
314,000 86,000

(These figures do not include the salaries of permanent staff).

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1615

Salary Levels of Technical Officers and Engineers in Statutory Authorities
(Question No. 4897)
Mr Maher asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Since the end of wage indexation, has the Australian Public Service Board increased salaries paid to technical grade officers in statutory authorities on three separate occasions by 25.9 per cent to 27.8 per cent.
(2) During a similar period were salaries of engineers employed in statutory authorities increased only once by between 10.2 per cent and 12.5 per cent.
(3) Do a number of situations exist within the Australian Public Service and statutory authorities where engineers are paid less than technical officers under their direct supervision.
(4) Why has the long standing relationship between the two salary groups in the Public Service and statutory authorities been disturbed.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) Since the abandonment of wage indexation technical grade salaries have increased on two occasions. On 22 October 1981 salaries were increased to overcome disparities between APS rates and those paid elsewhere which developed during the period of wage indexation. With effect from 8 April 1982 technical grade salaries were further increased to reflect movement in the pay market as a result of the metal trades industry agreement. The cumulative total of these two increases was between 20.46 per cent and 21.48 per cent. A further increase of 4.95 per cent with effect from 2 June 1982 to reflect further market movements as a result of the mid-term adjustment of the metal trades industry agreement is before the relevant industrial tribunal awaiting ratification. If approved the cumulative increase would be between 26.42 per cent and 27.49 per cent.
(2) Yes. Engineers' salaries were increased by between 10.2 per cent and 12.5 per cent on 28 January 1982 by a consent agreement.
(3) A small number of such cases do exist.
(4) There is no fixed relationship between the two salary groups. It is common for each group to receive appropriate increases in remuneration at different times depending on salary levels in the relevant pay markets and other factors for each group. Consideration of claims lodged by the relevant staff organisations covering engineers and related classifications is at an advanced stage but the Board has advised the relevant associations that it will respond to current claims as soon as practicable after a Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission hands down its Decision in the Clerical and Administrative Officers case.
Ethnic Radio
(Question No. 4292)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
What action has been taken to provide for more professional programs, a need identified by the Special Broadcasting Service in its 1980-81 annual report as a basis for extension of SBS ethnic radio.
Mr N. A. Brown:-The answer to the honourable member's question, provided by the Special Broadcasting Service, is as follows:

Since January 1978 the SBS has taken a number of steps to provide the basis of a more professional service on radio stations 2EA and 3EA. These include:
I. The acquisition of its own properly equipped studios, prior to which programs were pre-recorded either at home on frequently inadequate and sometimes faulty equipment, or recorded at studios scattered throughout a number of suburbs.
2. The establishment of record libraries in both Sydney and Melbourne, for which there is an annual program of expenditure on records and tapes.
3. The provision of regular homeland news feeds for major language groups in their respective community language and the development of a small, professional news and information service that supplies all groups with international, homeland, Australian and local news in English for translation and inclusion in programs.
4. Development of a community information service that, in co-operation with relevant Federal and State Government departments, committees and agencies, provides settlement and post-arrival information in the form of announcements segments for inclusion in all language programs.
5. Establishment of a formal, professional training course in conjunction with the appropriate educational bodies.
The SBS also considers the resolution of status of Broadcasters and Co-ordinators to be fundamental to its efforts to professionalise fully programs broadcast on Ethnic Radio, and is presently addressing this question in conjunction with the Public Service Board.
Telephone Services: Brisbane
(Question N~. 4496)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) How many applications for new telephone connections are currently outstanding in the Brisbane areas of Woolloongabba and Kangaroo Point.
(2) Have some applicants been told they would have to wait 8 months for these installations.
(3) Further to his answer to question No. 3365 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, page 150) in which he stated that additional cable and exchange equipment would alleviate existing problems by the end of February, (a) why are there still applicants waiting for connections and (b) has the new exchange equipment currently being installed a capacity of 1,000 connections; if so, how many of these are already allocated.
(4) How many applications were received in the last 3 years in the Woolloongabba exchange area.
(5) Were these figures taken into consideration when the new exchange equipment was ordered.
(6) When will the new exchange equipment for the Woolloongabba area be fully utilised and more equipment required for the exchange.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is as follows:
(I) Currently there are no applications outstanding.
(2) Approximately six applicants were advised that service may not be provided until September 1982 because of insufficient cable capacity in their area. However, due to a change in scheduling it became possible to complete this cable relief before the availability of the additional equipment and they were connected as soon as practicable after the extension to the Woolloongabba exchange was completed.

1616 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) (a) Installation of additional exchange equipment previously programmed for February 1982 was not completed until late April 1982. The delay was attributable primarily to unusual engineering complexities combined with the need to deploy installation staff to the South Brisbane exchange project. Connection of the deferred applications commenced as soon as practicable after the new equipment became available.
Although few of these connections had been effected at the time of enquiry, demand was satisfied soon after.
(b) Eleven of the 1,000 lines are reserved for technical testing purposes and 340 of the remaining 989 lines are available for customer use as at July 1982.
(4) 1978-79,844 1979-80,918 1980-81, 1,106
(5) Yes.

(6) The 1,000 line extension to the Woolloongabba exchange was completed on 31 May 1982 and it is expected that this will be sufficient to meet customer demand until March 1985.
Capital City Airports: Passenger Movements
(Question No. 4730)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What have been the total inward and outward passenger movements in each major capital city airport in each of the last 10 years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is contained in the tables which follow.

SCHEDULED REVENUE PASSENGER MOVEMENTS

Airport

Year Domestic

International

Commuter

Total

ending

December

In

Out

In

Out

In

Out

In

Out

Adelaide Brisbane Canberra Darwin Essendon

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978
1979 1980 1981
1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
1980 1981 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

541,904 639,103 717,981 751,042 765,054 833,654 881,859
934,942 986,516 948,898 762,824 955,329 1,075,979 1,127,249 1,044,267 1,082,203 1,130,872 1,203,076 1,323,271 1,344,825 360,480 439,236 477,852 488,765 435,015 458,524 482,013 475,782 475,736 412,331 66,643 81,157 100,247 126,851 101,059 107,823 119,121 136,330 148,800 143,646

532,448
632,705 707,879 755,275 767,178 829,803 875,776 933,853 975,946
940,466 748,928 944,855 1,066,428 1,124,053 1,028,096 1,067,683 1,119,668 1,193,769 1,309,368 1,334,699 365,882 444,116 483,523 493,123 437,338 458,566 479,950 475,384 475,421 412,730 66,169 78,704 102,627 114,656 98,721 104,604 115,147 132,085 146,273 142,162

34,679 55,751 69,887 98,803 128,515 127,282 138,175 154,961 176,610 204,633
12,682 15,099 19,684 4,671 9,613 10,151 10,085 10,812 14,510 17,629

36,370 51,295 64,030 91,640 126,015 123,573 134,013 146,151 165,650 191,663
14,776 15,989 19,945 6,180 II ,579 11,143 12,014 12,202 15,367 18,426

5,027 7,123 9,077 13,996 18,680 17,181 18,753 25,717 36,850 *42,184 4,362 7,395 9,835 16,274 19,616 24,533 31,073 40,998 52,840 *57,580
191 825 2,721 4,061 5,328 5,961 7,236 8,492 14,458 *12,841
*7,491 6,157 3,066 7,095 7,011 6,475 7,736 12,404 16,047 6,519 *9,121

4,752 6,633 8,557 13,981 18,079 16,922 18,177 24,730 35,740 *41,794 4,378 7,054 9,232 15,718 19,635 24,318 29,663 40,800 50,760 *55,822
162 844 2,651 4,106 5,402 5,770 7,047 8,074 12,946 *10,960
*7,325 6,122 3,123 7,071 7,150 6,404 7,955 12,492 15,179 6,525
*9,400

546,931
646,226 727,058 765,038 783,734 850,835 900,612
960,659 1,023,366
*991,082 801,865
1,018,475 1,155,701 1,242,326 1,192,398 1,234,018 1,300,120 1,399,035 1,552,721 *1,607,038
360,671 440,061 480,573 492,826 440,343 464,485 489,249 484,274 490,194 *425,172
79,325 96,256 119,931 131,522 110,672 117,974 129,206 147,142 163,310 *168,766
6,157 3066 7,095 7,011 6,475 7,736 12,404 16,047 6,519 *9,121

537,200
639,338 716,436 769,256 785,257 846,725 893,953 958,583
1,011,686 *982,260
789,676 1,003,204 1,139,690 1,231,411 1,173,746
1,215,574 1,283,344 1,380,720 1,525,778 *1,582,184
366,044 444,960 486,174 497,229 442,740 464,336 486,997 483,458 488,367 *423,690 80,945 94,693 122,572 120,836 110,300 115,747 127,161 144,287 161,640 *167,913
6,122 3,123 7,071 7,150 6,404 7,955 12,492 15,179 6,525 *9,400

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1617

Airport

Year Domestic

International

Commuter

Total

ending

December

In

Out

In

Out

In

Out

In

Out

Hobart

Melbourne

1,993,829

Perth

Sydney

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1972 1973
1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

117,500 173,389 194,767 181,961 202,285 209,969 223,036 230,598 237,646 232,912 1,474,664 1,783,826
1,996,732 2,068,923 2,067,310 2,165,653 2,312,938 2,457,658 2,589,151 2,519,999
263,608 299,987 337,065 344,791 334,400 378,240 409,387 443,054 463,075 480,397 1,931,672 2,234,767 2,437,327 2,498,169 2,397,435 2,493,708 2,699,990 2,884,850 2,995,544 2,915,163

118,039 171,621 197,003 196,528 203,769 210,166 224,754 232,977 241,026 237,260 1,474,973 1,798,331

270 9,531 144,932 213,696

358 8,012 135,303 193,149

1,832 2360 3,860 2,707 2,030 3,999 6,391 9,566 9,101 *8,062 2,147 2,551

1,905 2,582 3,853 2,843 2,020 4,004 6,665 9,509 8,804 *8,043 1,945 2,349

119,332 175,749 198,627 184,668 204,315 213,968 229,427 240,164 247,017 *250,505 1,621,743
2,349

119,944 174,203 200,856 199,371 205,789 214,170 231,419 242,486 250,188 *253,315 1,612,221 2,000,073

1,994,115 2,068,415 2,068,564 2,164,922 2,315,316 2,451,235 2,584,332 2,518,313
260,650 295,721 330,619 336,473 323,932 368,000 403,009 436,059 465,020 479,533 1,915,032 2,201,952 2,423,181 2,472,689 2,395,571 2,508,932 2,701,233 2,898,432 3,004,381 2,917,800

242,710 283,019 335,184 353,012 384,207 457,986 503,017 497,436
52,138 60,078 73,429 81,405 98,235 104,132 113,466 132,058 167,378 195,483 554,495 637,199 788,074 810,348 894,194 907,682 975,012 1,154,656 1,236,288 1,208,467

222,932 268,607 318,345 332,207 355,064 435,224 468,359 458,348 52,862 56,725 65,207 84,093 98,315 99,880 111,875 129,124 157,599 181,346 539,428 624,330 736,196 808,191 869,751 850,495 944,619 1,105,446 1,175,864 1,151,233

4,379 4,915 7,735 12,308 16,830 19,586 20,663 *27,162 11,304 11,602 13,260 10,899 10,074 12,829 14,868 15,108 23,424 *27,618 18,996 27,124 41,534 52,348 64,036 81,085 99,125 123,857 134,087 *131,442

4,303 4,617 7,543 11,340 15,334 17,897 19,744 *26,292 11,118 11,857 13,633 11,468 10,576 13,098 15,601 15,890 24,345 *29,343 17,903 25,601 42,283 50,785 62,505 78,932 95,248 120,952 130,818 *129,496

2,243,821 2,356,857 2,410,229 2,530,973 2,713,975 2,935,230 3,112,831 *3,044,597
327,050 371,667 423,754 437,095 442,709 495,201 537,721 590,220 653,877 *703,498 2,505,163 2,899,090 3,266,935 3,360,865 3,355,665 3,482,465 3,774,127 4,163,363 4,365,919 *4,255,072

2,221,350 2,341,639 2,394,452 2,508,469 2,685,714 2,904,356 3,072,435 *3,002,953
324,630 364,303 409,459 432,034 432,823 480,978 530,485 581,073 646,964 *690,222 2,472,363 2,851,883 3,201,660 3,331,665 3,327,827 3,438,359 3,741,100 4,124,830 4,311,063 *4,198,529

- Provisional.

'Ayiation Safety Digest'
(Question No. 4875)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to reports that the Aviation Safety Digest is no longer being regularly published and may be discontinued.
(2) If so, what substance is there to these reports.
(3) Has his Department produced an assessment of the Digest; if so, what is the nature of that assessment.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(I) I am aware of some reports which claim that the Aviation Safety Digest is to be discontinued.
(2) There is no substance to such reports. The frequency of publication has been restricted by difficulties in recruiting and retaining suitable personnel within the Bureau of Air Safety Investigation. The consequent staff shortage resulted in a situation where day-to-day investigative duties had to take precedence over the production of the Aviation Safety Digest.
Steps have been taken to improve the frequency of publication.

(3) Two reviews have been conducted of reader reaction to the Aviation Safety Digest. The first was a questionnaire distributed in 1976-77 to 2,000 selected recipients of the publication. An assessment of that review was printed in Aviation Safety Digest 100. The next review was contained in Aviation Safety Digest III and was primarily a review of the free distribution list. However, all readers were invited to comment on the publication and a significant number chose to so do. An assessment of that review were contained in Aviation Safety Digest 113.
In both cases the review was SUbjective in nature. The readers generally offered constructive criticism of the magazine but overall considered it to be a worthwhile contribution to accident prevention.
Adelaide Airport: Aircraft MoYements
(Question No. 4887)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Is he able to provide details of all aircraft movements at Adelaide Airport between the hours of II p.m. and 6 a.m. for (a) June 1981 and (b) June 1982, stating (i) aircraft type (ii) name of owner and (iii) purpose of flight.

1618 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) Will he clarify his policy on these flights in relation to Recommendation No. 5 of the second report of 1982 of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works; if not, why not.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Departmental records of all aircraft movements are not normally kept beyond a period of one month.
(2) A new curfew policy has been under consideration by the Aviation Industry Advisory Council, and a review of the overall situation will no doubt follow the deliberations of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation to which the question of aircraft noise has been referred.
Adelaide Airport: Runway Length
(Question No. 4888)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the April 1982 edition of the journal 'Astronautics and Aeronautics' which quoted 7,000 feet (2,132 metres) for aircraft carrying 150 passengers, 10,000 feet (3,045 metres) for aircraft carrying 250 passengers and 12,000 feet (3,655 metres) for aircraft carrying containerised freight as take-off distances used as design criteria by designers of regular public transport aircraft.
(2) Does Adelaide Airport, servicing regular flights carrying more than 250 passengers, have a main runway (2,258 metres) which falls far short of these design criteria.
(3) What notional take-off distances are applied to the three categories of aircraft by experts of the Department of Aviation.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. My attention has been drawn to the publication but any suggestion that the hypothetical or assumed runway length criteria referred to in the article are used by the designers of regular public transport aircraft is without foundation.
(2) The relationship between the hypothetical runway lengths used in the article for the purposes of comparing single fuselage and twin fuselage aircraft performances has no relevance to the safety of the real world operations conducted at Adelaide Airport.
(3) In their consideration of the adequacy of take-off distances at any airport the experts of the Department of Aviation do not categorise aircraft in this way nor do they apply notional take-off distances.
Runway length requirements are prescribed against internationally agreed safety standards, and an operator must demonstrate the ability of his aircraft to satisfy those standards as a pre-requisite to gaining approval to operate from a nominated runway. Having gained that approval all the prevailing variables affecting aircraft performance are taken into account for each take-off and landing to ensure that the safety requirements are still satisfied. When those calculations show that runway length is limiting, aircraft gross weight (one of the variables in the aircraft performance equation) is reduced to a point that preserves the margin of safety implicit in the established take-off performance standards.

Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Finance
(Question No. 4941)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) and (b) Procedures by which questions on notice are handled within the Department of Finance are as follows:
(i) The Parliamentary Questions Officer examines each Notice Paper and forwards any question asked of me to the relevant Division Head for preparation of a draft reply; and
(ii) Draft responses so prepared are endorsed by a Deputy Secretary and the Secretary of my Department before submission to me, through my Senior Private Secretary or my Private Secretary, for my consideration.
(2) 99 (not including questions transferred to other Ministers) .
(3) Two months.
(4) (a) 70 (35 of these were answered within one month). (b) 20. (c) 4. (d) nil. (e) nil.
(5) Five. None of these has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Electoral Claim Form: Wording
(Question No. 5017)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(I) Do the instructions to the claimant in section C on the reverse side of the electoral claim form use only masculine personal pronouns; if so, why.
(2) Will he rectify the wording of the instruction so that it applies equally to all persons seeking enrolment.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) While it is true that the instructions to the claimant and to the witness on the back of the Commonwealth electoral claim card for some States use the pronouns 'he' and 'his' in referring to the witness and to the claimant, such words used in this context are generic and have no sexist connotations.

Answers to Questions

16 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1619

(2) The Australian Electoral Office has been revising both the wording and the format of the claim card. A draft has been prepared to reflect the change from British subject status to Australian citizenship as the basic nationality qualification for enrolment. The draft avoids the use of words importing gender. However, because issuing a new claim card is such a costly exercise involving the printing of hundreds of thousands of cards, production of the new cards must wait until all the changes have been settled and the amending legislation is proclaimed. This involves consultation with States and amendment of the Electoral and Referendum Regulations. This amendment will be made as soon as possible.
Recognition of the Republic of China
(Question No. 5015)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 7 September, 1982:
Which countries and international organisations still recognise the Republic of China (Hansard, 8 March 1979, page 855).
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Countries:

According to information currently available, the countries which recognise the authorities in Taipei are:

Bolivia Costa Rica Dominican Republic
EI Salvador Guatemala Haiti Holy See Honduras Ivory Coast
Republic of Korea Lesotho Malawi

Nauru Nicaragua Paraguay
Panama St Vincent
Saudi Arabia South Africa
Swaziland Tonga Tuvalu
Uruguay

International Organisations:

The authorities in Taipei no longer have membership of United Nations bodies. They still have membership of the
Asian Development Bank. They also claim membership of the
International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy; the International Cotton Advisory Council; the Asian Productivity Organisation; and Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruc-
tion Organisation and the International Union for Publication
of Customs Tariffs.


