House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Tuesday, 12 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1891

Tuesday, 12 October 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
. MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) resigned from the Ministry yesterday. Following recommendations I made to the Governor General, His Excellency appointed the Honourable Andrew Peacock as Minister for Industry and Commerce. I also inform the House that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) left Australia on 25 September to attend a session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York. The Minister will also visit Western Samoa for discussions and will attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in Fiji. The Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) will act as Minister for Foreign Affairs until Mr Street returns.
MRJ. B. REID
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-At the end of the last sitting certain motions were moved in relation to Mr John Reid. For the information of Parliament I table a letter from the Commissioner of Taxation which has since been published in relation to Mr Reid's financial affairs and the affairs of certain companies which indicate in the clearest terms that there is no current tax liability and no liability under the special recoupment tax legislation which is currently before the House.
Suspension of Sessional and Standing Orders
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I move:
That so much of the standing and sessional orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. I, General Business, given for Tuesday, 12 October, by the Leader of the Opposition being called on forthwith.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Motion
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (1.48)-1 move:
That this House-
(I) deplores the Prime Minister's personal choice of Mr J. B. Reid as a member of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Administration because the said Mr Reid was a director of 4 separate companies which were sold on 28 June 1977 to 6 directors who are identifably part of the Brian J. Maher Group shown by the McCabe Lafranchi report as being responsible for massive tax evasion practices, the Maher Group direc-
, tors in question being John Patrick Donnelly, Terence

John Reilly, Al Gottersen, Graham Goldberg, Lee Gabriel Hurley and Geoffrey Delco;
(2) condemns the preference of the Government for people identified as being engaged in tax avoidance and evasion to represent it on public instrumentalities, boards and on committees of inquiry, and
(3) calls on the Prime Minister to have Mr Reid stand down immediately from the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Administration, the Board of Qantas Airways Ltd and the Board of the Australian BiCentennial Authority, to which he was appointed by this Government, until these matters are fully investigated.
When I gave notice of that motion in this House on 23 September I did so in good faith and on the basis of the information which was then available to me. Since then I have had no reason to change my mind about the justification for moving that motion. Indeed, investigations which have been carried out on my behalf and by me during the fortnight's recess since I gave notice of that motion confirm to me the need for this matter to be debated. An opportunity should be given to me to present what I regard as substantial evidence which, at least prima facie, establishes the need for a more thorough analysis of this matter than that which has been extended to it by the Government through the Taxation Commissioner to this point.
The letter of the Taxation Commissioner is unexceptionable as far as I am concerned. The Commissioner says that in relation to six companies Mr Reid has, and they have, no unsatisfied tax liabilities. That is the general tenor of the letter which was presented on 24 September by the Taxation Commissioner. That is unexceptionable. I remind the House of the terms of the notice of motion which I gave. I referred to tax evasion practices and I also referred to tax avoidance. We must make this distinction immediately: Tax evasion is illegal, although not terribly sedulously pursued by this Government; tax avoidance is the abuse of the spirit of the tax laws by using defects or weaknesses in the law to avoid tax which morally is payable, is liable.
There are certain practices which one would describe as blatant, contrived, artificial and beyond the bounds of reasonableness which, although legal, are tax avoidance and should be acted against. The terms 'blatant', 'contrived', 'artificial' and 'beyond the bounds of reasonableness' are terms that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has used in this Parliament in relation to what can be described as a dry Sllltzkin scheme. A dry Slutzkin scheme, very simply, is an arrangement whereby the accumulated profits which are liable to tax in the hands of the recipients, once they are distributed, cease to be liable to tax when they are capitalised by virtue of a sale, through whatever

1892 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ.B. Reid

process, to a promoter who is aiming at tax avoidance and/or evasion practices. It usually involves a result whereby the person, persons or organisation disposing of such a company with accumulated profits but not current profits, I declare, are associated with a sale price in excess of what could be reasonably expected as the maximum market price. All these things are associated with transactions related to the companies that I spoke about.
I think we ought to get something on the record straight off: I do not know Mr Reid and I make no personal assessment of the man. But in relation to the matter of taxation his care and application, his punctiliousness in relation to his moral responsibility-I stress the words 'moral responsibility'-to pay tax according to the spirit of the law I think were summed up very nicely on 23 June 1978 in the Australian Financial Review. It stated:
This was the clear message at the Institute of Chartered Accountants congress in Perth---
Perth is a salubrious city for tax evaders and tax avoiders, honourable members may have noted--
not only of lawyer and BHP director John Reid, stockbroker and Sydney Stock Exchange chairman Brian France and trade union official Mr B. J. Smith but came very close to the sentiments of Federal Treasurer John Howard.
John Reid showed that, irrespective of rights and wrongs, stockbrokers, doctors and lawyers have been engulfed in an avalanche of criticism because they have all lost touch with the community.
John Reid departed from his prepared address to suggest that the accountant's duty was to the person paying the bill and that it was the government's duty to remedy taxation ills and not to 'lumber' a branch of the community with the task, the reaction was predictable.
There are several newspaper comments of that ilk. Simply what Mr Reid was saying is that if one pays the piper one should be able to command the tune one wants and to blazes with ethics or morality in this sort of matter.
I go on to trace very quickly the historical movement of the companies that I will be referring to. They are: Printing Associates, Exeat, Ace Drive Yourself, Paravane, All Cars Drive Yourself and Kenny's Drive Yourself. These companies were disposed of on 28 June 1977 to a series of people whom I mentioned in the motion which I moved. On 9 June 1978 they were then disposed of to Lloyd Faint and Guide Securities, both named in the McCabe-Lafranchi report for their association with Mr Maher, and R. Southern. I understand that Mr Southern also has a close association with Mr Maher. On 23 June 1978 the companies went to Henry Kawalczuk,

an unemployed labourer who is in the business of taking over expensive companies, Pocita Lisa Pty Ltd and David Rayner. The former two were mentioned in the McCabe-Lafranchi report. Thereafter, we have been able to establish that a number of the companies eventually went to the bottom of the harbour in the colloquialism-that is, all papers, records and returns suddenly disappeared. To establish that there is a consistent pattern I seek leave to table the documents related to those companies and the transactions which I have briefly outlined.
Mr SPEAKER-I will not put the question of leave until there has been an opportunity for the Government side to look at the papers.
Mr HAYDEN-A number of people are mentioned in those documents who are identifiably associated with the Brian Maher tax avoidance and evasion operations. I seek leave to have that list incorporated in Hansard.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-What list?
Mr HAYDEN-It is a list of the people who are mentioned in those companies who are identifiably associated with Brian Maher's operations.
Mr SPEAKER-I will not put the question about whether leave is granted to incorporate the list in Hansard until there has been an opportunity for the Government side to examine it.
Mr HAYDEN-That in itself is interesting enough, but there is another aspect. There is an extraordinarily curious development in the process of all of this. These companies, I repeat, just before the end of the fiscal year, which is the usual practice adopted by Mr Brian Maher and people engaged in the sort of industry he is engaged in, were sold, eventually fitting into this Maher-type operation. But-this is important-only a few months earlier in February-March, at about the time of the Slutzkin decision by the High Court, all of those companies were the subject of a declaraton of solvency prior to winding up. The significance of that is very simply this: If they become insolvent, if there are solvency proceedings, the accumulated profits are distributed into the hands of certain recipients, whether companies or individuals, and are liable to taxation. That was the process in train. Suddenly, somewhere along the line, with a snap of the fingers the whole process was changed and this transaction was embarked upon which, by its result, guaranteed that that tax liability would not have to be met and that that which would otherwise have been regarded as and therefore treated by the Commissioner of Taxation as taxable income would become tax free as a capital gain. That is the nature of these transactions. I seek leave to have

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1893

incorporated in Hansard the table in relation to that matter and seek leave to table the documents in relation to it.
Mr SPEAKER-I will not put the question of leave until the documents have been examined by the Government side. I indicate to the Government side that the Leader of the Opposition has sought leave to incorporate and table further documents. I will not put the question at the moment.
Mr HAYDEN-I move on to the next salient point, that is, the capitalisation process. The figures established beyond any doubt that no reasonable person could have assumed that this was a legitimate transaction. I put on the record that at all times relevant to this transaction Mr Reid was a director of the said companies.
What the financial statements show is simply this: The total value of the several companies at 30 June 1977 was $470,576. The price paid by Laro Traders--that is the Maher groupwas $467,337. But there was a tax liability of $43,827 as a result of accumulated profits held within that company. I will put that in another way: The market value-the market price-after appropriate allowance was made for tax liability and for promoters fees in this was $423,510, to round off the figure; the sale price was $467,338. One would have to believe in Father Christmas walking around in the money markets of this country to accept that because what that means is that, as a result of the transactions, Laro Traders-Brian Maher's group-paid more for this block of companies than could have been reasonably expected to have been realised in the marketplace if liabilities had been properly met. I seek leave to have that table incorporated in Hansard and to table the relevant documents on this matter.
Mr SPEAKER-Again I draw to the attention of the Government side that I will not put the question of the granting of leave until there has been an opportunity to examine the documents.
Mr HAYDENI will not go into any more detail on the table because it speaks for itself. One cannot walk into the market-place and expect that there is going to be a mug around every minute who will pay more than the market would sensibly pay. Whatever one might think of Mr Brian Maher, he is not a mug when it comes to handling finances. He has made himself very wealthy at the expense of the taxpaying community. If honourable members are not too happy with that view, I will quote what the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) declared as a principle and a standard of ethics in relation to this matter.

He spoke to the New South Wales Chamber of Manufactures on 27 September, only a few days after I gave notice of my motion to the House. I would like to draw the attention of honourable members of the Government to this matter because it goes right to the heart of what I am saying about this matter. It may be that the Commissioner for Taxation can say there is no tax liability at law because there has been no tax evasion but, as a matter of morality, there is a moral responsibility to tax. That is exactly what the Prime Minister was saying in this speech and on a number of other occasions which I will quote from in a few seconds. The Prime Minister said:
I am told there are circumstances in which the vendorshareholder did not know that the purchaser was going to pay tax and that therefore he did not know that the tax was not going to be paid. I might at times find it difficult that he did not know because of the test-
There should be a 'sic' somewhere in parenthesis there; the Prime Minister must have written this speech. The Prime Minister continued:
this is part of the test of the legislation, is that on the basis on the price he gets for the shares, which is of course a capital price, there is not enough money left in the company to pay the tax. If you add the fee of the promoter together with the price of the vendor-shareholders, there was generally nothing left and so how was the tax going to be paid. Obviously in many cases it was not.
He is talking about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes; he is talking about wet Slutzkins. The principle in respect of what he was saying there applies equally to the dry Slutzkin cases that I have been talking about. The Prime Minister goes on to confirm the case I am making. He said:
It is the law together with an ethical attitude of society to the people with whom one does business, that makes this country and if we have to legislate for every wrongful act that people might have in mind, then we will be so subsumed in legislation of every kind Sir Lawrence Street and every judge in the land will have to work overtime and never get a Sunday off because so much would have to go to the courts.
The Prime Minister is saying exactly what I am saying: One cannot credibly argue that, if someone gives more than one could reasonably and properly expect in the market-place, one will not ask questions and be suspicious that there is something crooked going on and if it relates to one's tax liability one would know what it is. Secondly, it does not just require a declaration of the law to establish that one is doing wrong. In the words of the Prime Minister there is a matter of ethical conduct about wrongful acts which go beyond the law and we cannot pass laws on every matter.
So I have the Prime Minister completely endorsing the concern that I have raised on these matters. There we have it in a number of instances which I have mentioned to the House already. We have the historical movement of these companies

1894 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ. B. Reid

down in most cases to the bottom of the harbour, as far as we can trace them. We have a process of liquidation suddenly and inexplicably halted in circumstances which resulted in the avoidance of tax liable being paid. We have financial statements which confirm this. We have financial statements which show that more was paid for the company than could have been realised reasonably in the market place.
There is another puzzling aspect of all this. All six companies were owned by Shellbank Holdings. Shellbank was owned by Monty Holdings. Mr Reid was a director at all relevant times. From March 1982-bear this in mind as substantial circumstantial evidence which one must associate with all this-the media in this country were increasingly and more expansively reporting that the McCabe-Lafranchi report was going to be released and that it would foreshadow the stripping of hundreds and hundreds of companies. More than that, it was increasingly clear that it would be tabled in the Victorian Parliament by the incoming Labor Government. The Labor Government came in on 3 April. Curiously enough, according to documents in relation to Shellbank Holdings lodged at the Australian Capital Territory Companies office on 20 May 1982, a general meeting of Shellbank was called on 20 April. According to the documents lodged in the Australian Capital Territory Companies Office on that date the general meeting convened on 20 April 1982 authorised an increase in the company's share capital from $50,000 to $6m by the creation of 2,975,000 new shares. On 24 May 1982, three days before the McCabe-Lafranchi report was tabled in the Victorian Parliament, a declaration of solvency, which precedes liquidation of a company, was lodged. According to the document the liquidation commenced on 27 May 1982, the very day on which the McCabe-Lafranchi report was tabled. There is also a document which is the minutes of an extraordinary general meeting of shareholders on 26 May 1982 signed by Mr Reid-the said Mr Reid. Mr Speaker, I seek an extension of time.
Motion (by Mr Lionel Bowen) proposed:
That the Leader of the Opposition be granted an extension of time.
Sir James KiIlen-Will five minutes suffice?
Mr HAYDEN-I will need a good 10 minutes. This is a very serious matter. I have been challenged on it. If you are fair dinkum, you will face up to it. I have the evidence. Here are the documents to substantiate my claim.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Mr HAYDEN-Resolution 5 of that extraordinary general meeting provides:
That the liquidator be and is hereby authorised to destroy the books and records of the company six months after the date of dissolution.
It may be very innocent. It may not be. But in all the circumstances as I unfold the evidence associated with this matter do not honourable members agree, if they are in a reasonable frame of mind, that there is more than a prima facie case to be investigated? Put the Commissioner of Taxation to one side. We are talking about tax avoidance as well as tax evasion whenever we debate these matters. I mentioned both in the notice of motion that I gave in this Parliament. I knew that my information was reliable, was sound. I am proving it step by step. It is substantial. In July this year Mr Lafranchi circulated to all governments, both conservative and non-conservative, a list giving details of over 2,000 companies which Mr Lafranchi said were part of the Maher group of companies he had investigated but which were outside Victorian jurisdiction. The list included the six companies of which Mr Reid was a director and which were sold on 28 June 1977.
What are some of the defences which might be put up? Mr Reid, according to the record, has said that he is only a director. He has also claimed that he had a non-beneficial interest. It does not matter. At law a director has certain responsibilities to discharge. That is incontestable. Under section 229 (2) of the Companies Act he has to:
. . . at all times exercise a reasonable degree of care and diligence in the exercise of his powers and the discharge of his duties.
It does not matter if as a company director he is in that position in a non-beneficial sense. He is party to the decisions which proceed among the board of directors and he is therefore at law responsible for them. It might be argued, as I have heard suggested, that these companies were revenue reserve companies. Of course they were. They were dormant companies. We have only to go back to the letter that the Prime Minister wrote in 1977-1 will come back to it directly-through his principal private secretary, Mr Budd, to the Treasurer in which he outlined these sorts of companies-dormant companies, accumulated profit companies-which were being used to dividend strip to avoid tax liability. The Government is on record, a voluminous record, declaring its objection to these companies. I must say that action has not supported the declaration of concern.
It might be said that there were some intermediaries between the Brian Maher operation and the disposal of these companies by the people.

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1895

with whom Mr Reid was associated. Let us explore that proposition. It is rather curi0ll:s that a few of the people to whom these companies were disposed of in the first instance remained company directors for less than a day. S?me of their names are identifiable in ways which are quite interesting in relation to these sorts of practices. I get back to one simple fact: It does not matter who has been put between the Maher operation and the companies with which Mr Reid has been associated. In one or two instances, or several, or all of them, as the Prime Minister has said, one cannot sensibly or cogently.argue that there should not have been any questIOns asked, especially if one is an experienced company director as is Mr Reid, according to his record, when one is paid more than a market would sensibly pay for these companies.
The Government has been calmly accommodating dry Slutzkin operations and has been doing so for a very long time. In that respect the Government must shoulder the major share of the blame for the fact that these practices flourish so extensively and expensively in the community. On 12 July 1977 the Prime Minister was alarmed enough about dry Slutzkin operations, tax avoidance operations costing many millions of dollars to taxpayers in the community, that he wrote a letter to the Treasurer in which he outlined the practices which were used in these respect~. That letter is in that large folio of documentatIOn released by the Treasurer which damns the Treasurer and the Government and upholds the propriety and efficiency of the Australian Taxation Office. But the interesting thing is that right up until 1981 there was no effective action by the Government to stop dry Slutzkin operations. In 1978 legislation was passed and within a few days Mr O'Reilly, the Commissioner of Taxation, was writing to the Treasurer declaring that. the dry Slutzkins were going on as ever; advertisements were proliferating in the newspapers in spite of the legislation. It was, in a nutshell, ineffective. It was on the part of the market a Bronx cheer, a crude raspberry to the Government as to wha~ is was about. It was also evidence of how famt hearted the Government is in these matters. If anyone, however, tries to derogate in any wa~ at all the significance of tax avoidance practices where dividend stripping is involved, let me remind him of what the Treasurer said in this Parliament on 7 April 1978. He said:
. . . it is partir;ularly unfair when, in many cases, the persons involved in these schemes are the ones best able financially to accept their tax liabilities.
He went on:

It has long been recognised that it is ~easonable for taxpayers to so organise their affairs as to mmlmlse lIabIlIty for taxation. However, the Government belIeves that some techniques of tax avoidance are so blatant, contrived and artificial as to go beyond the bounds of reasonableness.
I agree with that view. A dry Slutzkin operation comes within the definition that the Treasurer has given in this matter. In those circumstanc~s my concern is that these matters ought to be mvestigated. I produce only the e~idence. !he .conclusions seem quite overwhelmmg at this pomt. I produce the evidence and I. say: On the ?as!s of that evidence on the baSIS of the prInciples declared by the Government and the concern it has enunciated many times firmly, and frequently fiercely, this matter must be investigat~d thoroughly and put beyond any doubt. The mquiry carried out by the Taxation Commissioner does not fulfil that requirement. The McCabeLafranchi report referred to numerous instances of tax evasion and avoidance associated with Brian Maher. The Treasurer said that over half of them were dry Slutzkin-type operations. If that is so the enormity of what we are considering looms very large because Mr Reid has been appointed by the Government to and continues to serve on a number of public authority bodies. That is why I believe, if the Government stands by the principle it has enunciated, these matters should be properly investigated. Costigan, in his fourth report, on pages 71 and 72, under the heading 'Misfeasance' said in relation to dry Slutzkins:
The target company was, as is frequently the case, a trading company conducting a legitimate business.
. . the following steps were taken to allow that to occur:
(c) the assets and liabilities of the target company were then transferred to the new corporate entity, leaving, at the end of the day, a target company with only cash in the bank. The amount of cash in the bank was equal to the accumulated profits, plus the current year profits (if any).
I stress the words 'if any'. So Costigan was talking about dry Slutzkins as much as wet Slutzkins when he was talking about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. Costigan continues:
The cash in the bank reflected that question, and it was on that amount that the percentage constituting the promoter's commission was calculated.
At a Liberal Party breakfast in Brisbane a few weeks ago the Prime Minister said this, with which I wholeheartedly agree:
If you have got something that is worth $1,000 and somebody comes along and says I can pay you $1,300 for tha~ aren't you going to wonder whether somethmg IS a bIt odd. You might just say well it is your good furtune, but I would have thought most people would ask some questIOns.
So would I, and I am asking them. I am asking the Prime Minister to ask them. I am asking the

1896 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ.B. Reid

Government to stand by the declarations it has made in this matter. It may well be that there is a reasonable explanation in this matter but that has yet to be established. It has to be established on the balance of the facts which are presented by a proper, thorough public investigation into this matter.
Mr SPEAKER~ls the motion seconded?
Mr Dawkins~ I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr SPEAKER-While the Leader of the Opposition was speaking he asked for leave to table a number of documents and leave to incorporate other documents in Hansard. Is leave granted for the tabling and the incorporation of documents in Hansard?
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows~
People, Companies involved in Reid Company Sales who are named in McCabe/Lafranchi Vol. I as being involved in Maher Operation
John Patrick Donnelly:
p. 15-16 Responsible for procuring sham directors for bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. Partner in Brian J. Maher and Co. and Maher's company, Commercial Securities Limited.
Jeffrey Thomas Daleo: p.45 Sydney agent for Brian J. Maher and Co.
p. 259 Manager Sydney Office of Commercial Securities.
Terence John Reilly: p. 72 Employed to assist Donnelly in preparation of the
documentation for tax avoidance schemes.
Lee Gabriel Hurley: p. 18 Had equity interest in Commercial Securities, co-
director with Maher and Donnelly.
p. 72-73 Chartered accountant. Shareholder in Maher
shareholding company Sharecap P/L. Took over responsi-
bility of preparing documentation of purchase and sale-on of

companies. Developed avoidance schemes such as 36A share trading partnership. Involved in Curran scheme activities.
Lloyd Errol Faint: p. 5, 260 Purchased "goodwill" of Commercial Securities
from Maher, this being a sham sale as part of scheme.
p. 15, 16 Responsible for procuring sham directors by arrangement with Maher. Arranged for others to procure sham directors, paying them commissions.
p.47-51 Faint had association with Maher back to 1968.
Guide Securities p. 4, 5 Part of Maher's operation along with Commercial
Securities, Brian J. Maher and Co. etc. Guide Securities purchased companies for Commercial Securities after 24/4/78.
Robert Southern: p. 131-36 Operated debt collection agency with a sham di-
rector John William Goode. Goode's company, fitted to him by Faint, purchased companies from the dealer. Southern was secretary of the Goode company.
Henry Kowalczuk, Pocita Lisa P/L: p. 166-171 One of 16 sham directors who "purchased"
companies from the dealer as a purchasing company. "Fit-
ted" to purchasing company Pocita Lisa P/L. Knew he was
involved in a "tax dodge".
p. 265 On 23/6/78 Guide Securities and the purchased companies sold by Faint to Pocita Lisa P/L with Kowalczuk as sham director-he became director of over 500 companies. "On a numerical basis, Kowalczuk who had been on the dole for a number of years became Australia's most well-known company director. His company purchased companies whose total funds on deposit were $67 million". These 500 included those bought on 9/6/78 (including Reid's). A famous director like Kowalczuk must have been well-known to Mr Reid'.

SUMMARY OF TRANSACTIONS

Total value of companies at 30.6.77 LESS Shareholders tax liability
Promoters fee
Market value Sale price

43,827
- - -3,2-39

$ 470,576
47,066
423,510 467,338

Tax saved

43,889

Name
Exeat Kenny's Paravane Printing Associates Ace Drive Yourself All Cars
Total

Unappropriated

Price paid

profits on

Total value

by Laro

which tax

at 30 June

Traders

payable if

1977' (MaherGroup)

liquidated'

$

$

$

336,782

336,738.78

948

33,465

33, I00.08

21,394

20,007.58

19,499.28

18,851.58

5,797

5,600

5,795

42,339

40,700.45

23,534

32,186 470,576.58

31,699 467,337.59

24,752 95,274.58

Capital reserves
$ 233,326
12,019
110
NIL
17,239
7,126 269,820

Issued capital
$ 102,508
52
904
2
206
308 103,980

Tax saved by not
liquidating $
436
9,841
8,672
2,666
10,826
11,386 43,827

MrJ. B.Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1897

* Calculation of Dealer's Commission:
Total value at 30.6.77 Less price paid by Maher

3,239 95,275

Unappropriated profits
= 3.4%

ALL SIX COMPANIES WERE TO BE LIQUIDATED IN 1977, UNTIL SLUTZKIN DECISION ON 25
FEBRUARY 1977

Company

Date of declaration of solvency
prior to winding up

Slutzkin schemes which the Leader of the Opposition has spoken about today, company tax was paid and no tax liability remains. The High Court of Australia in a judgment has quite specifically approved the dry Slutzkin schemes.

All Cars Drive Yourself Exeat Kenny's Printing Associates Paravane . . . Ace Drive Yourself

14 February 1977 3 March 1977 14 February 1977 February 1977 14 February 1977 14 February 1977

Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (2.19)-ln the last sitting week the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) introduced this motion into the Parliament. It was a despicable motion because it was using the privilege of Parliament to slander a person who, within 36 hours, it had been demonstrated was completely clear of the charges laid in the-
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition made his speech in support of his motion in silence. He was heard by the House. I ask honourable members on the Opposition benches to remain silent so that the reply may equally be heard in silence.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition has shown that he cannot accept the letter of the Commissioner of Taxation in which he makes it perfectly plain that there was no tax liability, and no tax liability under the recoupment legislation currently before this Parliament. The Leader of the Opposition issued a statement saying that he was thoroughly dissatisfied with the letter on the day, or the day after, it was published. He sought to introduce other and different issues. He sought to confuse this House with his wet Slutzkins and dry Slutzkins. Let me try to explain why there is a very substantial difference between these practices. Bottomof-the-harbour taxation schemes involve companies with current tax liabilities, which remained unpaid and which remain unpaid to this day, and which will be collected when the current legislation which is before the Parliament is passed by the Parliament. In addition, bottom-of the-harbour schemes are fraudulent in nature on the part of at least one person taking part in the operations. In relation to the so-called dry

Quite plainly, the Leader of the Opposition is trying to introduce into this Parliament a quite impossible proposition; namely, that any person who had at any time participated in any tax minimisation proposal which was subsequently outlawed by this Parliament and by legislation passed through this Parliament, or which was caught by section 4A of the general anti-avoidance provisions, would, therefore, not be a fit and proper person to hold public office. I suggest that that is an impossible proposition because practices change. This Government, and only this Government, has legislated time and again to outlaw improper taxation practices. If the Leader of the Opposition proposes to legislate at some point retrospectively or believes there ought to be retrospective legislation to collect alleged back tax in relation to all those schemes which have since been outlawed, obviously that is a total and absolute impossibility.
The Leader of the Opposition ought to be pressed to define what he means when he says that the Government's legislation does not go far enough, that he wants it to go further, and that he would collect additional sums from other tax minimisation proposals which have since been outlawed. The dry Slutzkin scheme was one in which company tax had been paid and no liability remained. The High Court has upheld that such schemes are in fact lawful. The Leader of the Opposition sought to impute in his motion that Mr John Reid had been involved in bottom-of-theharbour operations; that was the clear implication. It was just as clear as the implication that he made when he wanted certain names to be put together as a result of comments he made in relation to the Costigan Royal Commission report on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. There is only one reason that Mr Reid's name has been used in this Parliament. There is only one reason that this smear has been introduced into the Parliament. It is because Mr John Reid agreed to serve on a review in relation to the Commonwealth Public Service.

1898 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ.B. Reid

It is worth noting the response to the charge which was made in the Parliament. Mr Reid immediately stood aside. He wrote to the Commissioner of Taxation giving authority for full information to be made available. He strongly denied the imputation that had been made under cover of the Parliament as an unfair and unfounded attack which was bitterly resented. Indeed, it was unfair and is unfounded. Mr O'Reilly's reply was very clear. He said that there were no unsatisfied income tax liabilities, there was no bottom-of-the-harbour operation and the company would not be caught by the recoupment legislation. There was a total clearance with respect to existing and new legislation.
I want to table and have incorporated in Hansard two letters from the Australian Taxation Office which indicate that Shellbank Holdings Pty Ltd has also discharged all its tax liabilities.
Leave granted.
The letters read as follows-
AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE
Benjamin Offices, Chan Street, Belconnen (P.O. Box 15, Belconnen, A.C.T. 2616)
Telephone 64 I 122 Telex 62186
In Reply Please Quote: 01/A/94 549 940
Greenwood Challoner and Co Chartered Accountants G.P.O. Box 4265 Sydney, N.S.W. 2001
Dear Sirs
INCOME TAX: SHELLBANK HOLDINGS PTY LTD
Your reference: 5/12
Reference in made to your letters of 5 March 1982 and 14 April 1982 in which you sought approval of a proposal to make a bonus issue out of capital profits accumulated by Shellbank Holdings Pty Ltd, prior to placing the company in liquidation.
You will appreciate that any views expressed are subject to the reservation that when an assessment comes to be made, the Commissioner must apply the law as it then stands in the light of established facts and after having regard to the rulings of the courts and other appellant tribunals.
Subject to this necessary reservation, you are advised that your proposal to make a non redeemable bonus issue of shares to the value of $4,040,587.28 is exempt from tax in terms of Section 44 (2) of the Income Tax Assessment Act (1936) as amended.
Yours faithfully
(L. P. O'Halioran)
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Presented by Mr Fraser.

AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE
Benjamin Offices, Chan Street, Belconnen (P.O. Box 15, Belconnen, A.C.T. 2616)
Telephone 64 1122 Telex 62186
In Reply Please Quote: 01 / A/94 549 940/82
Mr Alan B. Bagnall (The Liquidator) Shell bank Holdings Pty Ltd C/o Greenwood and Challoner and Co G.P.O. Box 4265 Sydney, N.S.W. 2001
Dear Sir
On the basis of income tax returns and information furnished there is no income tax outstanding on income derived up to 26 May 1982.
Provided that-
(a) no further income from interest or any other source has been or will be derived subsequent to 26 May 1982; and
(b) all tax instalment deducations have been regularly accounted for, or the amount owing for tax instalment deducations is paid in full,
you may proceed to final liquidation.
It will not be necessary to lodge income tax returns on behalf of the company subsequent to the return for the period ended 26 May 1982.
Would you please furnish final accounts and a list showing the date of payment and amount paid in respect of each distribution made by you to each shareholder, indicating the extent to which each distribution included income.
This advice refers to income tax only and is issued without regard to any other debt which may be due to the department.
Yours faithfully
J. P. O'HALLORAN
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Presented by Mr Fraser.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Since Mr O'Reilly's letter became public, the Leader of the Opposition has continued to make allegations, He has continued to do so outside and inside the Parliament. He has continued to try to establish guilt by association. The important point for this Parliament to note is the state the company was in when it was sold. If all tax liabilities had been paid when the company was sold how could anyone try to impute guilt on a person on the basis of the nature of the purchaser of the company? Do the Leader of the Opposition or the members of the Labor Party look to the character of anyone if that person is selling a house or selling a mob of sheep at an auction? It is the state that the article is in when it is sold that counts. In this case the companies in which Mr John Reid was involved were in proper order. In addition to that, Mr John Reid had no beneficial interest in the companies. He, with two other people who were nowhere mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, were appointed as trustees to Mr McIllree in January or February of, I think, 1973-six or seven

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1899

months before Mr McIllree died of cancer but after he knew that he was going to die of cancer.
There were other trustees. There were other directors. Why is Mr Reid singled out? Is it only because he has been given a job by this Government? Is it only because he is working for this Government? The documents that have been tabled by the Leader of the Opposition indicate the names of the other directors, the names of other persons involved. Honourable members may be interested to look to those names to see what positions those people hold, what offices they are in, what positions they have been given by other governments of other political complexions. One of them at least is in a position now of some significance. If there is any guilt~which we very strongly deny~in relation to Mr Reid, there is guilt also in relation to other trustees. But there is no guilt in relation to any of them. The singling out of one name in relation to this matter emphasises the nature of the smear and what the Leader of the Opposition seems to be best at.
Mr Hayden~ Who are they?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER~I am asked: Who are they? But I am not going to use this Parliament in the way that the Leader of the Opposition has used this Parliament. The Leader of the Opposition by tabling documents has published the names of the other trustees. Honourable members sitting behind the Leader of the Opposition will be more than a little interested to know the particu~ lar offices that one of those trustees has and continues to have at this stage in a certain State. He also signed the sale documents. His name appears in the documents. It, admittedly, does not appear in the summaries that had been prepared for the convenience of the media and of the Parliament, I suppose, but it does appear in the background documents. It does appear in sale documents. He was part of the company organisation, part of the company management. The Leader of the Opposition, if he wants to smear, should smear the whole class and not just one person out of the class.
This is what the Leader of the Opposition is, of course, best at. It is the work that he enjoys most. It is the work that he seems best capable of. There are many examples of the Leader of the Opposition's smearing. We remember what he said about Nugan Hand Ltd. Earlier this year, he said in this House:
That this House-
(1) views with the greatest alarm public allegations today that a senior Minister of the Government has been responsible for preventing any action being proceeded with against Nugan Hand . . .

He also said:
I also understand that the affidavit will declare that the Deputy Prime Minister is the Minister concerned.
Later on, the Leader of the Opposition had to admit that the allegations were totally without foundation. He was asked this question on television:
Do you still believe that a senior Minister may have been involved in that cover-up?
He said:
I have never had any evidence of that.
There was no affidavit. That was a smear by the Leader of the Opposition.
The Leader of the Opposition smeared the right honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair) before reading the Finnane report. Within an hour of the report being tabled in the New South Wales Parliament he said in this Parliament:
Of course, I have not read a 700 page report.
Of course, he could not wait to accuse the right honourable member of what the Leader of the Opposition said, on the findings of that report tabled in the New South Wales Parliament that day, but which the Leader of the Opposition had not read, could only be described, apparently, as a succession of swindles. Of course, the right honourable member for New England stood down. He was charged. All charges fraudulently put against him by the New South Wales Attorney-General and the Corporate Affairs Commissioner of New South Wales were struck out. That was a politically motivated prosecution, probably motivated by the same people who gave the initial information to the Leader of the Opposition in relation to Mr John Reid. The only problem is that they did not tell him that in trying to capture John Reid they were also going to be capturing one of their own.
We can look at the confidential documents in relation to Mr Costigan. Mr Costigan has said on more than one occasion that even though he was pressed to allow us to publish the documents those two confidential documents should not be published.
I believe that the Leader of the Opposition wanted certain people to put two names together as a result of certain things that were said and certain implications that were drawn about categories of people mentioned in those reports. Somebody was foolish enough and stupid enough to do just that. But it was the Leader of the Opposition who turned the key that opened the door.
Mr Hayden~Ha, hal

1900 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ.B. Reid

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition might think it is a funny matter because he does think that smearing is humorous. But there are one or two people sitting behind him right at this moment, if he looks at them, who do not regard the matter as quite so funny because, as the Leader of the Opposition knows, it was a deliberate act. In addition to that, in spite of the fact that Mr Costigan has said it would be inaccurate to draw any specific conclusions from those reports as to who is or is not involved and in spite of the fact that other people who have read those reports have said quite plainly that one cannot draw any implications about relationships with people from any political party, the Leader of the Opposition continues to do so and did so as recently as three or four days ago in Brisbane when speaking on a teJevision channel. He was smearing again. In relation to that matter the Leader of the Opposition said:
There is some quite prominent names, there is some names which are identified very closely with the State Government or at least with some of the senior people in the State Government.
He said that on Channel 9 on I October. He added:
. but really I think we, are just about on the border or slightly over what I can talk about.
He said 'slightly over'. He was so far over the border of what he could talk about that he obviously cannot be trusted with confidential reports of that kind. What did this great, gentle advocate of justice say when one of our colleagues in this Parliament suffered from a heart attack? There was no sense of decency or comradeship. He said:
. . . the product of worry, some might say conscience.
That must be about the worst, most despicable and most contemptible thing any person has ever said in the Parliament. The Leader of the Opposition thinks it is a humorous and funny matter. He thinks it is humorous and funny but now he cannot take it. He just dishes it out and he does not like it when he gets his own medicine back.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes to raise a point of order he should say so.
Mr HaydenI thought I might be able to move an extension of time for the speaker. That is how disturbed I am. I would ask for an unlimited extension, if necessary.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The attack on Mr John Reid was just as disgraceful, especially its continuation after the Taxation Commissioner's full and total clearance in relation to any tax liability for those companies. As there were no tax liabilities for those companies when

they were sold it does not matter to whom they were sold any more than it matters in relation to the selling of a mob of sheep, herd of cattle, a house, a holiday home or any other article. The companies were sold in good order. That was the responsibility of Mr Reid and his co-trustees. There was an implied attack on the Taxation Commissioner. (Extension o/time granted). The Leader of the Opposition has made it plain that
his attack is not only on Mr Reid but also on the Taxation Commissioner. The clear implication of what he has said is that that letter is inadequate, that the examination was too quick and that the letter was not a proper letter for him to write. I suggest that if the honourable gentleman wants any further confirmation of that he should read the Senate Estimates Committee Hansard of last night in which Mr O'Reilly was questioned-as I am advised-in detail on that matter.
The Leader of the Opposition is a past master
at smearing in this Parliament. Is that because he is trying to be tough or is it just that he is mean and nasty himself? He admits, as he did recently, that he uses the Parliament for theatrical dramatics. I should have thought that it would be of more use to use this Parliament to discuss matters
of concern to the people of Australia. But if it is a matter of theatrical dramatics-to use his own term-he is a fourth rate actor and a fourth rate
politician who will always be unacceptable to the pUblic. More and more people now are saying very plainly that a few weeks ago the Labor Party made the wrong choice. Is the Leader of the Opposition really trying to strengthen his position in the Labor Party? Does he really think that he will attract people who supported Mr Hawke by this kind of tactic? He repels the Labor Party, he repels Australia and, having thrown dirt, he seeks to rub his hands in it. The Leader of the Opposition fails to understand that that letter from Mr O'Reilly, coupled with the other letters which I have tabled in relation to Shellbank Holdings Pty Ltd, because nothing had been said about that before, indicate quite plainly that Mr John Reid discharged his duties to the Australian Taxation Office and the Tax Commissioner and there the matter should rest.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (2.37)-1 second the motion. In doing so I might say that we have now seen a more characteristic Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) than we have seen in recent times. We have now seen revealed for us that all this thrashing about in recent weeks, all this thundering denunciation of tax dodging of any kind is now revealed as being completely shallow. We now see the Prime Minister like a cornered rat digging in behind tax dodgers and tax dodging.

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1901

Sir James Killen-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The language used by the honourable gentleman is demonstrably unparliamentary.
Mr DAWKINS-Which bit? The aged Minister for nothing does not seem to hear what I said. I saidthe--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask the honourable member for Fremantle to withdraw his statement.
Mr DAWKINSWhich one?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-I withdraw whatever the aged Minister for nothing wants me to withdraw. The point is that the Prime Minister--
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Donald Cameron-What about the airline ticket when you cheated on the taxpayers?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle will withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr DAWKINS-I have no idea what I am withdrawing, but I will withdraw it to satisfy you, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr DAWKINS-I have no idea what but, all right, to satisfy you, Mr Speaker, I will withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr SPEAKER-I did not hear what the honourable member for Fadden said. I gather from reaction that it was offensive to certain members. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr Donald CameronNobody claimed it was offensive because it was true.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fadden will withdraw.
Mr Donald Cameron-I said I will withdraw, even though it is true.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman--
Mr Donald Cameron-I withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-What I was saying is that the Prime Minister is like a cornered rat who is diggingin--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-Is that the bit you object to?
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-The Prime Minister has been cornered and he is now digging in behind tax dodgers and tax dodging. That is very much more

characteristic for the Prime Minister who has always been partial to a tax dodge, it being his Government which has introduced more tax rorts of one kind or another mainly to seek to advance its own favoured friends. Many of the particular tax rorts which have been introduced have ended up blowing up in his face. It has subsequently had to fix them up as their manifest inadequacies have been revealed. But what the Prime Minister is in fact seeking to do, and the only thing which he did do in the 20 minutes which was available to him, was to say that there is rarely some tax dodging which is okay and other forms of tax dodging which are not okay. What we want to know from the Prime Minister is simply this: The Leader of the Opposition has indicated he has tabled papers which indicate Mr Reid was associated with certain companies. The Leader of the Opposition has indicated, and I will again, that those companies were organised in such a way, or appear to have been organised in such a way, as to bestow certain tax advantages on either the companies, the shareholders or the people the directors are representing. What we want to know from the Prime Minister is: Were any of those six companies, of which Mr Reid was the director, involved in any kind of tax dodging against which this Government has already acted? Were those companies involved in any schemes which this Government has now outlawed? Is he prepared to answer that question? If he does answer it and if the answer is in the affirmative he seems to be saying that certain schemes, such as the dry Slutzkin scheme, are okay as long as they were carried out prior to the time the Government legislated. That is not what the Government has been ranting and raving about. It is certainly not what the Prime Minister has been ranting and raving about in recent times. I refer the Prime Minister to the I October edition of the Sydney Morning Herald in which he is quoted as saying:
But are we governed only by law? Is there not a question of ethics? Is there not a question of honour in the way in which people do their business? If every wrongful act has to be proscribed by law, then we're really going to be so circumscribed by laws, that you'll need a couple of solicitors behind you at every step and I don't particularly want to live in that kind of society.
In this instance the Prime Minister is not simply talking about what is strictly within the law at a particular time; he is talking about what is ethical and what is moral. Let us take this debate back to the circumstances in which it arose. The Prime Minister, in order to distract attention from the very glaring criticism of the Government in relation to its procrastination on tax dodging, said he was setting up an inquiry into the Public Service, as if the Public Service had something to do

1902 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ. B. Reid

with the Government's procrastination when it was quite clear that the Commisisoner of Taxation had increasingly been going spare about the fact that the Government would not act on any of his advice in relation to tax avoidance schemes. On that occasion the Prime Minister said:
The third challenge, I regret to say, arises from a deterioration in what I might call the 'business ethics' of a minority. There was a time when the administration, in its relationships with business, could assume that a high degree of trust was appropriate. The Service did not have to be geared to handle cheating on a large scale . . .
He then referred to the Service's inability to respond speedily and adequately to the challenges posed by those who seek to behave unethically or even illegally. He said:
Those in the community who cheat on their obligations to others or attempt dishonestly to evade the law, whether by evading taxation . . . not only bring dishonour to themselves but also impose real strains on the Public Service
The Prime Minister wants to set up an inquiry which can ensure that the Public Service, as a result, can be in better shape to deal with these tax cheats. Therefore, I would have thought that it was beyond argument that the people involved in that inquiry, particularly the person who was to lead it, should be entirely above reproach on any of those matters.
We are not talking about some strict definition of law breaking. The Prime Minister has not sought to use that on other occasions. We are talking about morality, business ethics and cheating. What has the Prime Minister been saying about some of those things? He went to Kingston recently. I am sure that he will not be invited back by the current honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman). He certainly will not be around when the next member for Kingston is in this House. What the Prime Minister said to the rapt audience of businessmen at Kingston was that he was talking about people who were trying to get rid of companies that had a tax liability to the Commonwealth to the benefit of the shareholders. There is no question about there being some strict distinction between company tax and money in the hands of the shareholders which would otherwise have been destined for the Federal Treasury. He was talking about schemes which avoid the tax liability of companies to the benefit of shareholders. He said:
In a real sense, the recipients of those funds have in their hands stolen funds, whether you want to say stolen from the Commonwealth or stolen from other taxpayers
He was not saying that only the money that has been ripped off the Treasury in relation to company taxes is stolen money; he was talking about all of it as being stolen money and those

people who have it as being the recipients of stolen money. He continued:
In relation to tax avoidance, I have said on other occasions and other places that people who pursue and generally people of wealth who pursue practices which only result in the cheating of the Commonwealth or the cheating of the generality of the Australian public in a highly sophisticated way in which wealthy people often become wealthier, is something totally un-Australian---
In recent times we have seen the Prime Minister in great form thundering denunciation of tax avoidance of any kind. Now he is seeking to justify that certain activities and certain kinds of theft which are involved in denying the Treasury money which was due to it are okay as far as he is concerned. That is not the view of the Treasurer (MrHoward). It will be remembered that these six companies had already embarked on the process of liquidation. If that liquidation had pursued its full course the shareholders who received the distributed assets of those companies would have been taxed, in their own hands, that part of the distributed assets of the company which represented profits from former years. That is the process on which these companies have embarked-to liquidate and to distribute their assets, and then the shareholders would have been liable for tax in their own hands.
Mysteriously, in February of 1977, that course of action was changed. It was perhaps changed for the reason that in February 1977 the Barwick High Court, which has accurately been described at that time as the tax avoiders temple, had given a decision in relation to the Slutzkin case. What the High Court had said was that to engage in certain artificial practices in order to avoid tax was okay. At the same time as that judgment was brought down these six companies altered their course and pursued an entirely different course which resulted in shareholders avoiding a substantial part of the tax liability which they would have incurred had those companies been liquidated in the normal way. In 1978 the Treasurer clamped down on some of these aspects which had been revealed by the Slutzkin scheme and particularly by the High Court decision of the time. At that time the Treasurer said of these schemes which we are now talking about:
However the Government believes that some techniques of tax avoidance----
Tax avoidance not tax evasion-
are so blatant and contrived and artificial as to go beyond the bounds of reasonableness.
What the Treasurer was talking about, and he was absolutely right at the time, was that any scheme which involved the artificial avoidance of a tax liability was unacceptable to the Government. Regrettably it took the Government until 1981 to

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1903

move on the particular aspect of these schemes which allowed shareholders to receive the benefits of those companies and not pay tax on them. The Government cannot have it both ways. The Prime Minister cannot continue to claim that this Government has an unparalleled record in relation to clamping down on tax avoidance schemes and at the same time say that the people who were involved in the schemes were really not doing anything wrong.
The Government simply cannot have it both ways. We have identified and had tabled in this Parliament details of 22 schemes which this Government has outlawed during the last few years. Those 22 schemes are in the blatantly artificial and contrived category of which the Treasurer was so critical in 1978. This is the kind of scheme in which Mr Reid was involved. I have indicated that had the process of liquidation continued the shareholders would have been liable for tax. Apparently as a result of resorting to different procedures in relation to getting rid of these companies the amount of tax which was saved in 1977 dollars was over $43,000, which in current day terms is $76,000. We are not suggesting that Reid is in Horgan's category. We are not suggesting that Reid is the worst tax dodger in the country. What we are saying is that, quite clearly, the companies with which Mr Reid was associated were involved in avoiding tax to the tune of $43,000 for their shareholders at the time. He is not on that evidence a fit person to lead this inquiry.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.51)-There are two aspects of this motion that I would like to canvass. Firstly, there is the central issue; and it was only in the dying moments of his remarks that the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) decided that he would make the claim that Mr Reid was not a fit person to hold certain offices. His leader was a little shy about making that claim. All that his leader was prepared to do was to say that these matters required some further investigation. But the bold man from the west was prepared to go a little further and to say that he was not a fit and proper personto hold these offices. Before I move to that, I would like to canvass another matter which is relevant to this issue. We have now spent something like an hour debating some allegations about the fitness of a person to serve on a public body. It is but the latest example of the way in which over

the past two months the privilege of this Parliament, the privilege of the New South Wales Parliament and, dare I say, the privilege of other parliaments have been used and abused to smear and denigrate the reputations of people around the country.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr HOWARD-In case in their contrived, blatant and artificial anger honourable members opposite believe that I am being selective in what I am saying about the abuse of parliamentary privilege, I remind them that, when the friend of the
honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), the honourable member for Cronulla in the New South Wales Parliament, Mr Egan, made his illfated attack in the New South Wales Parliament, I said that it gave me no pleasure that once again the parliamentary privilege of an institution in this country was being used to denigrate, perhaps in an unsubstantiated way, the reputations of people. There was a time when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) even argued that a partnership between a husband and a wife for a corner store represented a form of tax avoidance. He said that during the 1977 election campaign. Whatever our views about the relative blameworthiness of different tax minimisation and tax avoidance arrangements, that gives but one illustration of how very subjective and very varied judgments on this issue can be.
In respect of Mr Reid, in many of the comments made in another place and here about Mr Horgan and in the remarks made by Mr Egan in the New South Wales Parliament, we have witnessed one of the worst abuses of parliamentary privilege that we have seen in this country for many years. The result of that has been twofold. First, it has really diverted us from a rational debate upon our taxation system and the right way of going llbout stamping out tax avoidance and evasion in this country. It has converted the debate into a slanging match about personalities and it has diverted the debate entirely from a proper examinaton of the issues. So I say firstly to the Leader of the Opposition and to the honourable member for Fremantle, confused though they may be as to precisely what they think about Mr Reid, that I believe today is yet another example of the extent to which parliamentary privilege has been abused in this debate. Are we to have introduced into the House a motion saying that somebody publicly known 10 years ago took a cash payment for laying a carpet and that, therefore, that person ought to be thrown off some body that he is on? There will be no end to this kind of process unless we get a far more rational approach to it. If, person by person, individual by

1904 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

MrJ. B. Reid

individual, that kind of approach is adopted, I suggest that the time of this Parliament between now and the bicentenary will be spent in debating those kinds of issues.
Let me move to the second point. It is really the core of this argument. When the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) gave notice of his motion in the dying hours of the last sitting of the Parliament, the purpose of that motion-let us be honest about it; I am sure that he will be honest about it-was to create the impression that John Reid was a tax evader. That was the purpose. It was not some kind of innocent--
Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Just to assist the--
Mr Nixon-Never mind the resolution; tell us what is in the speech.
Mr Hayllen-I will get into trouble if I take advice from you, Peter. Mr Speaker, I shall not hold up the House. The lie to the statement of the Treasurer is given in the Notice Paper, where the terms of my motion are given.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman should not use that-
Mr Hayden-Not distortedly, as the Treasurer is seeking to do.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition must listen when I ask him to be silent. I will not allow him to use the word 'lie'. If he wishes to make a point of order he can do so without using an unparliamentary expression.
Mr Hayden-No, Mr Speaker. I apologise and say 'terminological inexactitude', at which he is greatly skilled.
Mr Keating-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Treasurer, in the course of his remarks, tried to associate me with a statement that Mr Egan made in New South Wales. I just make this point: At least he owned up to his mistake, which is more than the Treasurer has done. The Treasurer saw the revenue defrauded for five years and sat on his tail and did nothing about it.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr HOWARDMr Egan was sold a dump by Neville Wran. The honourable member can ask anybody around Macquarie Street. He is a mate of the honourable member. He is part of the right wing machine in New South Wales and the honourable member knows it. He blundered very badly and, of course, the honourable member is very sensitive about it because it did not come off. The nub of this issue is the impression that the

Leader of the Opposition sought to create. Let me say again that I believe that any reasonable political observer would have thought at the time the Leader of the Opposition gave notice of his motion that the Leader of the Opposition was trying to create the impression that in some way Mr Reid had been associated with that kind of tax avoidance activity that was being outlawed by our legislation. That was the impression. It was not a gentle searching from the heart inquiry as to facts; it was a deliberate attempt by the Leader of the Opposition to create that impression. I think he failed to do that and I think the most effective demonstration of that failure is for me to quote from the letter of the Commissioner of Taxation. It is worth repetition.
Mr Hayden-You are on the wrong debate.
Mr HOWARD-He does not like it. The Commissioner of Taxation, in his letter of 24 September, said:
I am able to advise you that the six companies have no unsatisfied income tax liabilities in relation to the period up to the time at which you ceased to have any connection with them . . .
I repeat that the Commissioner said:
. . . no unsatisfied income tax liabilities . . . . up to the time at which you ceased to have any connection with them . . .
He continued:
and it follows from that you will have no responsibilities under the special recoupment tax legislation introduced into the Parliament last night.
The Commissioner then went on to say:
There are no unsatisfied income tax liabilities in relation to the sale of the shares in the companies.
I will repeat that:
There are no unsatisfied income tax liabilities in relation to the sale of the shares in the companies.
In both respects there is a very critical difference between what exists in relation to those companies and what exists in relation to the schemes and arrangements that are struck at by our special legislation. The Commissioner then went on to say:
As requested in your letter, I have also checked your personal situation. I am able to state the information available to me shows that you have discharged all your responsibilities in respect of your own taxation affairs.
That is the testimony about the taxation record of a person whom the Leader of the Opposition, whatever he may say today, sought by implication to paint as a tax evader when he brought that motion before the House. I say what I said at the outset of my speech: We have witnessed over the past few weeks-of which this is but one of a number of examples-an extreme abuse of parliamentary privilege by the Australian Labor Party

MrJ. B. Reid

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1905

in this place and by the Labor Party in the New South Wales Parliament. As a consequence and as
a result parliamentary time has been wasted. The Commissioner of Taxation's letter regarding Mr Reid is very clear and unambiguous. 1 and the
Government believe that that ought to be the end of the matter. We believe that the Leader of the Opposition stands condemned for having introduced this motion to the Parliament. 1move:

That the question be now put.

Question resolved in the affirmative.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

42

Noes

64

Majority

22

AYES
Beazley. K. e. Blewett. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John Brown. Robert Cass,M.H. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duify,M.J. Free. R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Innes. U. E. Jenkins. H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J.
Kent, L. Kerin. J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon. Les Maher, M. J. Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris. p, F. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Ureo, T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony,J. D. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. 1. Bourchier,J. W.
Brown. N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron, Ewe" Cameron. Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean.A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser. Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom. R.J.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.
Jarman.A. W. Jull, D. F.
Killen. Sir James Lloyd, B.
Lusher. S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J. e. Newman, K. E. Nixon. P.l. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M.

Hall, Steele
Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J.
Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M.
Howard,J. w.

NOES

Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

PAIRS

Dobie,J.D.M. Porter,1. R. Bradfield, J. M. Lynch, Sir Phillip Chapman, H. G. P. Street, A. A. Braithwaite, R. A.

Armitage, J. L. Campbell,G. Everingham, D. N. Fry, K. L. Jacobi, R. Jones, Charles Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the negative,

ADJOURNMENT
Flinders Electorate: By-Election
Motion (by Sir J ames Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (3,10)-1 ask that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stay in the chamber to hear what I have to say, Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister, in giving ministerial arrangements, announced the resignation of one of his Ministers, We are aware from the Press that he has had a discussion with the Minister who also announced that he would be resigning from Parliament 'within a matter of weeks', As this relates to a by-election can the honourable gentleman indicate when that will be held?
Mr SPEAKER-I say to the honourable gentleman that the question of when the by-election is to be held is a matter for the Speaker.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Yes, 1 know. 1 thought that you would be interested,
Question resolved in the affirmative,
House adjourned at 3.11 p.m.

PAPERS
The folIowing papers were deemed to have been presented on 12 October 1982, pursuant to statute:
Air Force Act~Regulations~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 248.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Act~Regulation~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 240.
Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court Act~ Regulations~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 246.
Bankruptcy Act~Rules~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 247. Barley Research Levy Act~Regulations--Statutory Rules
1982, No. 238. Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) Act~Regulations-.
Statutory Rules 1982, No. 237. Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act~Ordinance~1982~No. 6~
Medical Practitioners. Customs Act~Regulations~Statutory Rules 1982, Nos
236,252,255.

1906 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

Papers

Dairy Produce Act - Regulation-- Statutory Rules 1982, No. 243.
Distillation Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 256.
Excise Act RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 254.
Family Law Act-Regulations--Statutory Rules 1982, No. 244.
Federal Court of Australia Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 245.
Health Insurance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982,No.251.
Health Insurance Commission Act-Regulation-- Statutory Rules 1982, No. 249.
Homeless Persons Assistance Act--RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 241.
Judiciary Act-Rule of Court-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 262.
Lands Acquisition Act Land acquired for Postal Services-Balranald, N.S.W.
Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
Lighthouses Act-Regulations -- Statutory Rules 1982, No. 242.
Live-stock Export Charge Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 261.
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act -Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos 239, 260.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 258.
National Gallery Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 259.
National Health Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 250.
Patents Act-Regulations--Statutory Rules 1982, Nos 232,233.
Public Service ActDetermination-1982-No. II.
Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 257. Public Service Arbitration Act-Public Service
Arbitrator-Determinations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the Law-1982-
No. 90--Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t
No. 1l7-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others.t
No. 431-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).t
No. 432-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t
No. 433-Civil Air Operations Officers' Association of Australia.
No. 434--Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others. t
Nos 435 to 437-Commonwealth Medical Officers Association and others.
No. 439-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 440-Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. t
No. 441-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t
No. 443---Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others. t
No. 444--Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of Australia. t
No. 445-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t
No. 446--Electrical Trades Union of Australia.t No. 447-Australian Public Service Association
(Fourth Division Officers).t

No. 448-Commonwealth Works Supervisors Association.
No. 449-Australian Staffing Assistance (Papua New Guinea Association).
No. 450-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 451-Australian Broadcasting Commission Senior Officers' Association and another.
No. 452--Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others.
No. 453-United Firefighters' Union. No. 454---Administrative and Clerical Officers' As- . sociation, Commonwealth Public Service. t No. 455-Printingand Kindred Industries Union.t No. 456-Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union
of Australia.t Nos. 457 to 460-Commonwealth Foremen's Associ-
ation of Australia (Australian Public Service). No. 462-Australian Public Service Association
(Fourth Division Officers). No. 463--Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Ship-
wrights Union and others.t No. 464-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.t No. 465-Royal Australian Nursing Federation.t Nos 466 and 467-Federated Storemen and Packers
Union of Australia. No. 468-Meat Inspectors' Association, Common-
wealth Public Service. No. 469-Australian Public Service Artisans' Associ-
ation. (t Not accompanied by statement) Seat of Government (Administration) Act-
Ordinances--1982No. 78-Real Property (Amendment). No. 79-Registration of Deeds (Amendment). No. 80-Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Amendment) (No.2). No. 81-The Commercial Bank of Australia Limited (Merger). No. 82-The Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Limited (Merger).
Regulations-I 982No. 43 (Adoption of Children Ordinance). No. 44 (Building and Services Ordinance). No. 45 (Plumbers, Drainers and Gasfitters Board Ordinance) . No. 46 (Justice Ordinance).
Spirits Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules
1982, No. 253.
Superann uation Act - Regu la tions -Sta tutory
Rules 1982, No. 235.
Trade Marks ActRegulations-Statutory
Rules 1982, No. 234.
REPLY TO A REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMA TION
Parliament House Accommodation
Mr Milton asked Mr Speaker, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Did the joint meeting of the Presiding Officers' Parliament House Accommodation Advisory Committees on 26 May 1981 recommend that (a) the offices of the Joint House Department located in rooms L165 to L171, L175 and L177 to L180 be removed from Parliament House, (b) the Department of the Parliamentary Library Stores, Registry and Mail Room be removed from Parliament House, (c) the Parliamentary Library Legislative Research Service groups of Foreign Affairs and Law and Government be relocated within Parliament House, (d) the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Inter-Parliamentary Union and New Parliament

Requestfor Detailed Information

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1907

House secretariats be removed from Parliament House, (e) Room L22 be used as a Committee Room, (f) consideration be given to an extention of offices along the front facade of Parliament House to the extremity of the columns and (g) the House of Representatives Attendants' accommodation in Room L2 be relocated.
(2) If so, was that recommendation unanimous.
(3) What decisions have been taken by the Presiding Officers on these recommendations.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The Accommodation Committees of both Presiding Officers have appointed sub-committees. The two subcommittees held a joint meeting on 26 May 1981 at which the recommendations referred to in the honourable member's question were agreed to, in principle.
(2) Yes.
(3) The recommendations were considered by Mr President and me. I indicated to Mr President that insufficient consideration appeared to have been given to the effect of the proposed changes on the functioning of the parliamentary staff involved. To date only those arrangements which effect the re-Iocation of staff of the Parliamentary Library have been satisfactory.

1908 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Equal Employment Opportunities: Department of Employment and Industrial Relations
(Question No. 4142)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on \0 March 1982:
(I) Does the Minister's Department have an equal employment opportunities program; if so, (a) how long has the program been in existence, (b) what are the aims of the program, (c) what is the Department's assessment of the success of the program in achieving its aims, (d) how have, or are, the aims of the program been, or being, met. (e) is the program aimed at covering the whole Department, or merely a section of it, (f) what are the procedures for union consultation and involvement in the program, (g) what involvement does the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board have in the program and (h) has the program changed in its priority rating within the Department since its introduction.
(2) If there is no program, on what basis was this decision reached.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(a) The Program has been in existence in the former Department of Employment and Youth Affairs since April, 1980.
The former Department of Industrial Relations including the Offices of the Industrial Registrar, was relatively small with approximately 460 employees located in all States, NT and ACT. The Department was created in December 1978 and assumed responsibility for its own management functions in July 1979. Since that time it has supported equal employment opportunity principles for all Departmental staff.
(b) The aim of the program is to ensure that the most suitable person occupies each position within the organisation and that each individual within the organisation has equality of opportunity in his or her employment.
(c) The program has met the stated aims. With the creation of the new Department of Employment and Industrial Relations a new program is now being developed which will further encourage full participation in Departmental operations and activities.
(d) The aims of the program were met by first identifying those categories of staff who may have been disadvantaged in their employment opportunities and then by raising awareness to the requirement to ensure that there is equal employment opportunity.
(e) The program is aimed primarily at Central Office staff and through them the Regional Staff and the Commonwealth Employment Service.
(f) None.
(g) The program was developed at the instigation of the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board.
(h) No.
(2) Not applicable.

Crude Oil Levy
(Question No. 4160)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 11 March 1982:
What revenue has been collected from the crude oil levy in each year since its inception.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Year

Crude oil levy

LPG levy

Total (a)

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

($m)
(b) (b) (b) 1,189 2,227 3,019 3,104

($m)
(b) (b) (b) 37 43 89 60

($m)
264 344 476 1,227 2,270 3,108 3,163

(a) differences between sums of components and totals are due to routine rounding.

(b) Not recorded separately.
Unemployment
(Question No. 4235)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) Are the Commonwealth Employment Service and the Department of Social Security co-operating on the boundaries of regions serviced by offices of each department.
(2) Does the overlap of boundaries cause problems; if so, what plans are being considered to eliminate these problems.
(3) Is there any method currently being used by the CES to measure regional levels of unemployment; if not, why not.
(4) Is the Works Program System, by which CES staffing is supposed to be determined. still in operation; if not (a) when did it cease operation and (b) when last in use did it indicate that an increase in CES staff was needed.
(5) Which senior management personnel have resigned from his Department in the last 12 months.
(6) Did the transfer of responsibility for accepting unemployment benefit forms SUI9A and SUI9B to the Department of Social Security result in a staff loss from the CES; if so, (a) how was any staff loss calculated and (b) was any account taken of staff time needed to handle the new system of communication between CES and the Department of Social Security regarding termination of benefits, change of address, and so on.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. There are a number of factors which make this impracticable, e.g., there are many more CES offices than DSS offices; CES offices deal with both applicants and employers and the boundaries are set to take this into account.

Answers to Questions

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1909

(2) No.
(3) No. The statistics of persons registered with the CES suffered from a number of major deficiencies and cannot be regarded as an accurate measure of unemployment. Compilation by the CES of these figures was terminated in April 1981 following a decision in the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(4) No. (a) The Works Program System ceased operation in mid 1981: it has since been replaced by a new system called Staff Utilisation and Performance Review, which identifies trends in CES workload and indicates an appropriate distribution of staffing resources. (b) Yes.
(5) As at 23 March 1982, senior management officers i.e., second division officers who resigned in the previous 12 months were Mr P. E. F. Kirby and Mr G. Bride.
(6) Yes. (a) On the basis of the number of Unemployment Benefit forms lodged and the average handling time per form. (b) Yes.
Insurance Companies
(Question No. 4263)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 March 1982:
(I) Did he inform the House on 20 February 1979 that it was his intention to introduce an 'early warning system' designed to indicate to the Insurance Commissioner in advance the possibility that an insurance company might default in meeting policy holder's claims; if so, can he provide details of the proposed legislation, its effect and proposed date of introduction.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Business Review Weekly for March 6-12, 1982 warning policy holders that they should check their insurance companies because of the high probability of a number ofliquidations in the general insurance area; if so, have (a) increased costs and (b) decline of investment income of insurers, increased the possibility that insurers may be unable to meet claims of policy holders.
(3) Is it the attitude of the Government that policy holders should have access to the greatest possible range of information to enable them to be informed as to which insurers are able to meet claims; if so, does he intend to introduce amending legislation to ensure that the Insurance Commissioner and the Life Insurance Commissioner are given powers to publish full information required by statute to be provided by insurers; if not, why not.
(4) Does he intend, as a result of the recommendations of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry, to sponsor consequential amendments to the provisions covering life assurance and, in particular, to strengthen the provisions of this legislation relating to solvency and the permitted investment of life insurers to ensure that such insurers will be, and will be known to be, in a position to meet claims; if not, why not.
(5) Is there a real and clearly perceived danger that both general and life insurers may be unable to meet claims from premium and investment income; if so what (a) steps does he intend to take to overcome this gap and (b) consideration has been given to (i) the present need for increased powers of the Insurance Commissioners over the permitted investment of life and general insurers and (ii) strengthening requirements of existing legislation to provide more information relating to the solvency of insurers.
(6) if it is considered desirable to change or increase the disclosure provisions or provide for more adequate disclosure of information relating to the solvency and profitability of insurers in order to give early warning of their possible inability

to meet their claims, what factors would prevent either the Insurance Commissioner or Life Insurance Commissioner from making such critically important information a vuilable to the public to enable either existing or potential policy holders to make an informed choice upon the solvency Or otherwise of a particular company.
(7) How many times have the Insurance Commissioner and the Life Insurance Commissioner exercised their powers under their respective legislation to require the provision of financial information from insurers other than that provided in quarterly returns as required by the respective Acts.
(8) Has either Commissioner taken any action as a result of information obtained in this way; if so, (a) under what circumstances and (b) how often.
(9) On how many occasions since I January 1978 has an inspector been appointed under the provisions of any legislation relating either to life or general insurance.
(10) Can he (a) specify the name of the company concerned on each occasion and (b) indicate whether such appointments will be made within the next 6 months; if not. why not.
(II) Did he inform the House on I May 1979 that his Department maintained a constant monitoring process of domestic and overseas legislation; if so, (a) has this function continued and (b) has he given any further consideration to the question of whether legislation similar in effect to the Policy Holders Protection Act of the United Kingdom will be enacted in this country.
(12) What specific domestic and overseas legislation has his Department considered in the course of its monitoring function and what legislative action or other action does he propose to take as a consequence.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I assume that the honourable member is referring to the answer which I provided on 20 February 1979 in response to the twelfth part of a previous question by the honourable member. In that answer I indicated that the Insurance Commissioner was introducing new procedural arrangements which would provide an Early Warning System somewhat similar to that used in North America but substantially adjusted to suit Australian requirements. The Insurance Commissioner reported on the implementation of the system on page 9 of his Fifth Annual Report, that is, for the year ended 30 June 1979. The introduction of the system was not dependent upon any legislative changes; however, improvements to the system have been sought by the Commissioner and provisions of relevance to this matter are contained in Clause 23 of the Insurance Amendment Bill 1982 which was introduced into the House of Representatives on 29 April 1982.
(2) I am aware of an article on the insurance industry contained in the Business Review Weekly for March 6-12,1982. The ability of an insurer to meet claims can be dependent upon other factors besides those mentioned by the honourable member. Other important considerations include the level of paid-up capital and reserves held by the insurer, its reinsurance arrangements, and the overall quality of management of the insurer.
(3) The Government recognises the importance to policy owners of adequate access to financial information in assessing and comparing the financial strength of insurers. In this respect it is, of course, open to those insured to seek information from companies additional to that available from published sources. In considering statutory requirements for the disclosure of information, there are other considerations to be taken into account, including the need to maintain an appropriate degree of commercial confidentiality (an aspect recognised in the secrecy provisions to be found in both Acts), the costs

1910 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

Answers to Questions

associated with such disclosure and the intelligibility of such information to the general public. In this context many of the existing forms for collecting information from insurers under the Acts were not designed for public disclosure. However, while some amendments to the Life Insurance Act 1945 effected last year (see Schedule I of the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981) and the amendments in Clause 37 of the Bill referred to in (I) above have some relevance to this matter, the Government will be giving consideration to the issues in this area as part of the process of assessment of the Report of the Campbell Committee. In this context I have in mind particularly certain relevant conclusions in Chapter 20 of the Report.
(4) The Government will be giving careful consideration to the conclusions and recommendations of the Campbell Committee including those of particular relevance to both life and general insurance industries. In respect of the latter, the honourable member's attention is drawn to those provisions in the Bill referred to in (I) above concerned with increasing the solvency requirements reflected in the Insurance Act 1973.
(5) See (2), (3) and (4) above.
(6) See (3) above.
(7) and (8) The Insurance Commissioner and the Life Insurance Commissioner are, respectively, in continuing contact with authorised general insurance companies and registered life insurance companies. The purposes for which contact is made are numerous and varied and relate to the entire range of their respective responsibilities for the administration of the Insurance Act 1973 and the Life Insurance Act 1945. Consequently, it is not possible to provide information of this kind.
(9) and (10) The information that can appropriately be made available in this area is limited in view of the potential harm that could be done to a company and, in turn, to its policyholders. In this regard, the secrecy provisions of the Insurance Act 1973 and the Life Insurance Act 1945 are relevant. It might be mentioned, however, that, where inspections of general insurers have led to the issue of directions by the Treasurer under paragraphs 62 (I) (a), (b), (c) or (d) of the Insurance Act, details are published in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette and related information is published in the Insurance Commissioner's Annual Reports. Equally, it is not appropriate to make a prediction whether appointments of inspectors will be made within the next 6 months. These appointments are dependent upon many future contingencies and are subject to provisions in the Insurance Act and Life Insurance Act under which a company is entitled to an opportunity to show cause why an inspector should not be appointed.
(11) and (12) In my answer of I May 1979 to a question asked by the honourable member, I referred to the normal process of monitoring and review of domestic and overseas insurance legislation. This function is a continuing one and involves a wide range of material received concerning developments in various countries including the United Kingdom. Relevant developments in the various States of Australia are also monitored. Certain conclusions in the Report of the Campbell Committee are relevant to the United Kingdom Policy Holders Protection Act; in particular, it might be noted that the Committee came to the conclusion that there is no need for government involvement in any arrangements along the lines of those provided for in this Act. This conclusion will, of course, receive consideration by the Government along with any relevant recommendations which the Law Reform Commission might put forward as a result of its inquiries into the law of insurance contracts. I understand the Commission's Report is expected to be available within the next few months.

Commonwealth Departments or Agencies: Lease of Office Space at WhyaUa
(Question No. 4298)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
What is the total rent paid by the Government for the leasing of office space at Whyalla, South Australia, by (a) the Department of Social Security, (b) the Commonwealth Employment Service and (c) any other Commonwealth departments or agencies.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) $17,000 per annum; (b) $6,300 per annum; (c) $3,400 per annum, Department of Transport. $2,000 per annum, Department of Administrative Services (Second Electorate Office for Mr L. G. Wallis, M.P.). $28,000 per annum, Australian Telecommunications Commission.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Education
(Question No. 4416)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on the duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) All supervisors and operators of screen based equipment are being individually provided with copies of Public Service Board Memorandum 81/418. New operators will be provided with a copy as part of their induction process.
(b) (i) and (ii) There are four categories of staff who use screen based terminal equipment within my Department and statutory authorities.
(i) Word Processing Operators
(ii) Operators of data processing equipment in State Offices
(iii) Computer Programmers preparing program suites
(iv) Clerical and Librarian staff.
The first three categories use screen based equipment extensively during the working day. In State offices operators of data processing equipment may also perform word processing in addition to the capture of data from student assistance application forms. The work load of these staff exhibits a high peak during February through to May, but is significantly less at other times of the year and consequently some of these officers may be transferred to other clerical tasks during that part of the year.

Answers to Questions

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1911

While it is difficult to generalise, it is expected that operators falling in category (i) will spend 90 per cent of their working day operating screen based equipment, with the remainder of the time spent in preparing work for processing and checking printouts of completed work. [n practice most operators do conform to the expected work pattern. However they are encouraged to take rest breaks as they feel these are necessary in order to avoid fatigue.
Officers falling in category (ii) will usually spend 75 per cent of their working day operating screen based equipment and the remainder of the day on related clerical tasks. [n most State offices a deliberate policy of rotating those staff to other duties is practised.
Staff falling in category (iii) may also spend 90 per cent of their working day operating screen based equipment, but their use of such equipment is less regular than that of officers faIling in categories (i) and (ii). Staff in this category spend their working day in preparing programs. diagnosing program faults, and in system testing. This involves desk work as well as the use of terminals. As the nature of the work varies throughout the system development and maintenance cycle it is not possible to be specific with respect to the daily or weekly pattern of terminal usage. Officers falling within category (iv) use screen based equipment on a casual or ad hoc basis for enquiries or report generation in support of their normal duties.
(c) (i) and (ii) In the word processing areas operators are expected to perform at keystroke rates laid down by the Public Service Board for typist classifications. Statistics have been kept in the Central Office of the Department since January 1982 with relation to the number of pages produced per operator per hour. Actual key strokes per hour are not calculated, nor are operators continually assessed on the basis of their keystroke rate. The nature of a word processing operators task within the Department is such that an assessment based purely upon a keystroke rate would be an invalid indicator of work performance.
[n State offices. figures are kept on the number of student assistance applications processed by operators, but keystroke rates are not determined. nor are the operators continually assessed on this basis.
No figures are available on the keystroke rates of staff engaged in programming duties or those staff who use the equipment on a casual basis.
Exports to South Africa
(Question No. 4487)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a letter sent to all members of Parliament by Mr W. Bosman, Counsellor, South African Embassy, Canberra, in which it is claimed that there has been a significant increase in Australian exports to South Africa from $65m in 1978-79 to $132m in 1980-81.
(2) Is there any substance in this claim; if so, what are the principal components of Australian exports to South Africa.
(3) What is the current United Nations policy on trade by member countries with South Africa.
(4) Does Australia accept any restrictions on trade with South Africa recommended by the United Nations.
Mr Street~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am familiar with the contents of the letter sent to all members of Parliament by Mr W. Bosman, Counsellor, South African Embassy, Canberra, in which it is claimed that

there has been a significant increase in Australian exports to South Africa between 1978-79 and 1980-81.

Australian exports to South Africa increased from $A67.5m in 1978-79 to $A 132.8m in 1980-81. Principal Aus-
tralian exports to South Africa in 1980-81 were:

$

Motor vehicles and transport equipment

13.3

Parts and accessories for road motor vehicles

8.8

Animal oils and fats

8.2

Agricultural machinery, excluding tractors

5.6

General industrial machinery and equipment

5.2

Other machinery specialised for industry

5.1

Manufactures of metal n.e.s.

4.7

Electrical machinery

4.5

Barley, unmilled

4.4

Fish, crustaceans and molluscs

4.1

(3) The United Nations General Assembly discourages trade with South Africa. By Resolution 36/ I72 of 17 December 1981, which reiterated similar earlier resolutions,
the General Assembly called for an oil embargo and the cessation of 'all direct and indirect trade and commercial transactions with, as well as loans to and investments in, South Africa'.

(4) There has been no mandatory action by the Security
Council to restrict trade with South Africa, and the decisions of the General Assembly have only recommendatory force. In these circumstances the Australian Government allows nor-
mal economic relations with South Africa, but without avoidable official assistance. In accordance with this policy, all governmental promotion of trade and investment in South Africa has ceased and Trade Commissioner activities at the Johannesburg post are limited to providing basic market in-
formation and assistance to Australian exporters. In addition, EF[C investment insurance, export insurance under national interest provisions and finance on concessational terms are
not available.

Legal Aid
(Question No. 4507)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
(I) Has the Attorney-Genera!'s attention been drawn to an allegation in the Australian Financial Review of 4 December 1981 that the Australian Legal Aid Office denied legal aid to an intellectually handicapped Commonwealth pensioner as a result of political interference in its functions.
(2) Has the Law Reform Commission accepted written and oral submissions by Mr Frank Rees in relation to the allegation.
(3) [s the Commission now prepared to verify the facts COntained in the submissions; if so, why.
(4) Will he ensure that the submissions made by Mr Rees are published in the final report of the Commission or otherwise made available for the information of senators and members.
Mr N. A. Brown~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, The allegation referred to was contained in a letter to the editor of the Australian Financial Review from a Mr Frank Rees dealing with class actions. The legal aid application referred to in the letter was made a number of years ago to the Australian Legal Aid Office in Victoria. That office has now been absorbed by the Legal Aid Commission of Victoria, an independent, statutory body established under State legislation. The Commission has inquired into the allegation and has advised that in 1977 the Australian Legal Aid Office

1912 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

Answers to Questions

refused legal aid to the applicant because the legal proceedings for which aid had been sought were considered not to have reasonable prospects of success. That decision was taken in light of an opinion to this effect provided to the Office by counsel.
(2) At a public hearing of the Law Reform Commission, on 15 November 1979, Mr Frank Rees made an oral submission, together with written material.
(3) No. The functions of the Law Reform Commission are limited by section 3 of the Law Reform Commission Act 1973. Shortly stated those functions are to review or consider proposals for the making, consolidation or repeal of all laws, whether statute law or the rules of common law or of equity, that the Parliament has power to amend or repeal and to consider proposals for uniformity between laws of the Territories and of the States. Those functions do not include a power of investigation of particular complaints and allegations except to the extent that that course is necessary in carrying out its functions.
(4) No. The content of the reports of the Law Reform Commission is for the Commission to determine. It has been the practice of the Commission to include a list of persons who have made submissions but not to reproduce those submissions in its reports.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Housing Panel Incorporated
(Question No. 4621)
Mr Morris asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Acting Deputy Crown Solicitor, Mr R. F. Hiscock, advise Messrs MacPhillamy Cummins & Gibson, legal representative for K. F. Shatzman Pty Ltd, by letter of 13 August 1979, that the Commonwealth did not accept any liability pursuant to the sub-lease of that company to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Housing Panel Incorporated; if so, what were the specific reasons for the Acting Deputy Crown Solicitor so advising Messrs MacPhillamy Cummins & Gibson contary to the advice provided by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs in his letter to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated on 12 September 1978 that funding for that year would be restricted to meeting all liabilities of the Panel properly existing at 15 August 1978.
(2) In what specific circumstances is the Commonwealth Government enabled to transfer financial responsibilities and liabilities of Commonwealth agencies such as the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated from the Commonwealth to the individual members of the Commonwealth agencies.
(3) On what other occasions has the Commonwealth pursued the same course of transferring liabilities for a Commonwealth agency to individual members of that Commonwealth agency as was the case with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated and what was the extent of the liabilities involved in each case.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As to the first part of the question, yes. As to the second part of the question, the letter correctly represented the legal position and was sent upon the instructions of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
(2) and (3) The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated was an association incorporated under the Associations Incorporation Ordinance 1953 (Australia Capital Territory). It was not a Commonwealth agency. Moreover, the Commonwealth did not transfer financial responsibilities and liabilities of the Panel to the Panel's

members. Accordingly, the matters referred to in these questions do not arise.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Housing Panel Incorporated
(Question No. 4622)
Mr Morris asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Can the Minister say whether K. F. Shatzman Investments Pty Ltd obtained judgment against the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated in the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory for the sum of $10,507.31 plus costs to be taxed in respect of moneys owed to K. F. Shatzman Investments Pty Ltd, being moneys related to rents due under the sub-lease of premises from the company to the Panel.
(2) As the Panel was a Commonwealth agency, does the Commonwealth Government propose making funds available to ensure that the company is paid in full in respect of the judgment obtained in the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory against the Panel.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) On July 21 1981, judgment was entered in the Supreme Court of the Australia Capital Territory in favour of K. F. Shatzman Investments Pty. Limited against the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated in the sum of $1 0,507.31 plus costs to be taxed. The claim for which judgment was entered comprised:
rent, percentage increase in rates, and electricity costs,
in relation to a sub-lease of premises from the plaintiff to the defendant.
(2) The Panel was an association incorporated under the Associations Incorporation Ordinance 1953 (Australian Capital Territory). It was not a Commonwealth agency.
I am informed by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, within whose responsibilities this matter falls, that the Commonwealth does not propose making funds available to enable the judgment debt to be paid.
Office of the Commissioner for Community Relations: Complaints Regarding Discrimination
(Question No. 4633)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) How many inquiries have been made to the Office of the Commissioner for Community Relations in the last year.
(2) How many of these were complaints regarding discrimination.
(3) How many of these complaints required direct action by the Commissioner to resolve them.
(4) In how many cases was legal action, (a) considered necessary, and (b) initiated.
Mr N. A. Brown~-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Information from the Human Rights Commission is to the effect that:

Answers to Questions

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1913

(I) from I April 1981 to 31 July 1982 there were 1386 inquiries in the form of complaints made to the Office of the Commissioner for Community Relations;
(2) of these, 946 complaints related to racial discrimination;
(3) action was taken in respect of all complaints by the Commissioner or staff of the Commission;
(4) in none of these complaints was legal action considered necessary or initiated.
Corporate Sponsorship of Television Programs
(Question No. 4667)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(J) Has attention been drawn to claims by friends of the ABC and others that so called corporate sponsorship of television programs in the United States of America have had the effect of eradicating program content which may somehow appear to be inimical to the corporation's interests.
(2) Has he expressed a preference for some corporate sponsorship of the Australian Broadcasting Commission as recommended in the Dix Report.
(3) Has he (a) received or (b) commissioned any study into the effect of sponsorship on television program content in the USA; if not, why not.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) In my announcement on 4 July 1982 of the Government's Decisions in response to the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission I advised that the Government had decided not to approve the Dix recommendation on the introduction of corporate sponsorship for the ABC.
(3) No specific studies into the effect of sponsorship on television program content in the USA were received or commissioned. Considerable information relevant to the Australian situation was available to the Government.
Medical and Hospital Practice and Administration
(Question No. 4684)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether the quarterly journal Australian Clinical Review aims to assist development of responsible continuing assessment of standards and efficiency in medical and hospital practice and administration.
(2) If so, is this aim consistent with the aims of the recently discontinued government publication the Australian Prescriber which has been praised world-wide for its contribution to such aims.
(3) Will he advise the Government that negotiations should be undertaken to incorporate the functions of the Australian Prescriber in the Australian Clinical Review by negotiation with its publishers in order to preserve the skills and values of key participants in the discontinued publication.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Australian Clinical Review was established by the joint Australian Medical Association/Australian Council on Hospital Standards Peer Review Resources Centre to provide in concise lucid terms what professions are doing to sustain

programs of quality assurance, utilisation review, and continuing education.
(2) to (3) As I announced on 29 August 1982 the Australian Prescriber will now be produced by the Australasian Medical Publishing Company, initially as a supplement to the Medical Journal of Australia. The company hopes that the Prescriber will also be able to be included in the journals of other professional bodies. It will also be available generally on subscription. Such an arrangement has potential for a much broader distribution amongst health professionals than association with single, specialised journals.
Commonwealth and State Assistance for New Building Lots
(Question No. 4694)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the claim in the March 1982 report of the Western Sydney Regional Organisation of Councils that over the 1971-81 period Commonwealth and State assistance per new building lot for Campbelltown was $7600 and for the Western Sydney area was $100-120.
(2) What was the Commonwealth financial assistance per new building block for the (a) Campbelltown, (b) Liverpool, (c) Fairfield, (d) Holroyd, (e) Blacktown, (f) Penrith, (g) Hawkesbury and (h) Baulkham Hills local government areas for the period 1971-81.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am aware of the report titled 'Local Government Finance and Commonwealth Revenue Sharing in Western Sydney' prepared by the Western Sydney Regional Organisation of Councils and have, in fact, written to the Chairman of the Organisation concerning aspects related to Commonwealth assistance to local government under the tax sharing arrangements.
Without knowing the basis for the figures quoted it is not possible to comment on the claim about relative assistance to Campbelltown and to Western Sydney. In so far as the figures appear to be related to assistance provided to the New South Wales Government for the Macarthur Growth Centre and the Land Commission of New South Wales my colleague, the Minister for National Development and Energy advises that funds provided for this purpose were not allocated by the Commonwealth on a local government or per building block basis, but as lump sum loans to the New South Wales Government under the Urban and Regional Development Act 1974. The amounts provided between 1974-75 and J977-78 were $28.1 m for the Macarthur Growth Centre and $ J7m for the Land Commission of New South Wales. (The Commonwealth also provided grants totalling $800,000 and $101,000 respectively for the Macarthur Growth Centre and the Land Commission of New South Wales between 1974-75 and 1977-78.)
Other Commonwealth assistance to local government, either under the tax sharing arrangements or under specific purpose programs, is not directly related to the development of building blocks.

1914 REPRESENTATIVES 12 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Citizenship Applications: Case Load at Parramatta Office
(Question No. 4698)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
What was the citizenship on-hand case load (a) at the Parramatta office of his Department, (b) for New South Wales, and (c) for Australia on (i) 30June 1981 (ii) 30June 1982.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Parra-

Aust-

malta NSW ralia

(i) At 30June 1981 Applications on Hand Prior to D-
eCISIOn Approved applications on hand
prior to conferral of citizenship (ii) At 30 June 1982
Applications on hand prior to d-
eCISlon Approved applications on hand
prior to conferral of citizenship

2,750 15.459 28,860 663 5,715 12,651
4,525 15,727 31,551 2,619 9,309 20,304

Urea Formaldehyde Foam Insulation
(Question No. 4719)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
In reference to the continuing sale of urea formaldehyde foam insulation, could he state (a) what steps have been taken to implement the National Health and Medical Research Council's decision on maximum levels in domestic and school environments, (b) what steps have been considered in relation to the removal of the substance when it exceeds the Council's recommended levels and (c) what compensation is proposed for domestic owners faced with removal where toxic levels are in excess of the Council's recommendations.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The National Health and Medical Research Council's recommendation concerning urea formaldehyde foam insulation was referred to State and Territory health authorities, other responsible authorities and interested bodies for appropriate action.
Testing procedures and any subsequent actions are the responsibility of State, Territory and local authorities.
In the Australian Capital Territory, the Department of the Capital Territory has indicated that a building permit will be required before insulation using urea formaldehyde foam can proceed.
(b) At the national level, no consideration has been given to the removal of defective urea formaldehyde foam or any other material which has the potential to produce formaldehyde gas. Such matters would normally be resolved at the local government level.
(c) No proposal has come to my notice.
FAt8 Aircraft: Cost
(Question No. 4725)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:

(I) Was the estimated (a) total program cost of the F IA-18 aircraft $A2430m and (b) average unit flyaway cost $A21.5m, both expressed in August 1981 prices, when the decision was announced in October 1981 to purchase the
aircraft.

(2) In view of such factors as cost escalation in the United States program, inflation and currency exchange fluctuations,
what is the latest estimate expressed in (a) current Australian dollars and (b) August 1981 prices of the (i) total program cost and the (ii) average unit flyaway cost.

Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes.

(2) My predecessor said on 20 October 1981 that the

Government in the cost of

twhoeuFldI Ak-e1e8pptrhoejeHcto. uIswe iillnfhoornmoeudr

of movements that undertak-

ing. Periodic formal reviews of F IA-18 project costs are

planned. The first of these will be in 1983 following a joint

United States-Australian project review planned to be under-

taken late in 1982.

Historic Ketch 'Falie'
(Question No. 4729)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
With reference to the Prime Minister's statement of 7 July 1982 regarding the purchase of the historic ketch Falie-
(a) from whom was the ketch purchased,
(b) will the Commonwealth Government be supplying funds for its restoration,
(c) what will further contributions to the South Australian Government be used for,
(d) on completion of restoration for what purpose will it be used,
(e) has the Commonwealth made similar gifts to any other States over the last 10 years,
(f) are there any similar gifts planned for other States in the future.
Mr McVeigh--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The historic ketch Falie was purchased by the Government of South Australia from Spencer Gulf Transport Ltd. As indicated by the Prime Minister in his statement of 7 July 1982, the Commonwealth had agreed to meet the full cost ($180,000) of the purchase,
(b) and (c) In his statement, the Prime Minister referred to the purchase of the Falie as a highly commendable project and worthy to receive this first instalment of a Commonwealth gift of $2m to be made to South Australia. This gift would be a Commonwealth contribution to South Australia's 1986 Sesquicentennial celebrations. No decision as to the specific use of the balance of the $2m has been taken as yet,
(d) The South Australian Government has advised that on completion of restoration, the Falie will be used during 1986 for major historic re-enactments after which it will be a working museum exhibit at Port Adelaide,
(e) Yes. The Prime Minister announced on 15 November 1978 that the Commonwealth was making a gift of $750,000 as a contribution towards Western Australia's 150th Anniversary celebrations, and

Answers to Questions

12 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1915

(f) The Prime Minister announced on 21 June 1981 that the Commonwealth would make a gift of five million

dollars as a contribution towards Victoria's 1984 Sesquicentenary celebrations.


