House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Wednesday, 15 September 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Notices ofMotion

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1433

Wednesday, 15 September 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
INQUIRY INTO ATTEMPTED MURDER Notice of Motion
Mr LUSHER (Hume)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That, in the opinion of this House, a Royal Commission or a Judicial Inquiry should be established to inquire into and report upon the failure of the New South Wales Government to apprehend and bring to justice the persons responsible for an attempt to murder Mr Peter Baldwin.
HOUSING Notice of Motion Mr UREN (Reid)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) congratulates and thanks the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace for the publication of House and Home-a Christian call for housing justice;
(2) expresses its concern at the Government's failure to provide sound estimates of housing needs in Australia; and
(3) condemns the Government for neglect of housing needs and its failure to provide co-ordination in the field of housing policy.
SMALL BUSINESS IN DROUGHT AREAS Notice of Motion
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House requests the Government to introduce urgently measures to assist small business in declared drought areas by calling on-
( I) the State Governments of Victoria and New South Wales to provide urgently assistance to small business in these areas by providing carry-on loans up to $40,000 at 4%;
(2) all lending authorities to adjust all existing loans at overdraft rate;
(3) all lending authorities to provide extra funds where need is proven;
(4) all lending authorities to refrain from ca\ling in loans or seeking reductions of these loans for a period of 12 months from the end of drought; and
(5) finance organisations providing loans for floor plan finance to take no action to ca\l in these loans for a period up to 12 months after drought ends.
POLAND Notice of Motion Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-

( I) notes with concern the arrest in Poland of the Leaders ofKOR (the Workers Defence Committee), including Mr Jacek Kuron, and Mr Adam Michnik;
(2) deplores the preparations for a revival of show trials in Poland; and
(3) calls on the Polish Government to take steps for the immediate release of Mr Kuron and Mr Michnik.
TASMANIA
Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) deplores the statement made by the Federal Hotels' legal representative, Mr Rick Southey, at the Victorian Casino inquiry in Melbourne on 14 September 1982 that Tasmania had lost its reason for being before the Wrest Point Casino was built; and
(2) reminds the public of Australia that there is more to Tasmania than two casinos and always will be.
NUGAN HAND MERCHANT BANK
Notice of Motion
Mr MacKENZIE (CaJare)-1 give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That, in the opinion of this House, the Attorney-General of New South Wales should be ca\led upon to persona\ly give evidence before the Stewart Royal Commission with respect to serious a\legations of major funding donations by the Nugan Hand Merchant Bank to the Australian Labor Party in New South Wales and attempts by the said Bank to improperly and criminally apply pressure upon the Attorney General with intent to cause a perversion ofjustice.
SMALL BUSINESS IN DROUGHT AREAS
Notice of Motion
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) calls on the Government to provide assistance urgently to employees of sma\l businesses in declared drought areas by allowing employees stood down for temporary periods to be eligible for unemployment benefits immediately they are stood down instead of having to wait normal time;
(2) ca\ls on employers to rotate staff on a part-time on, part-time off basis, such as 2 weeks off, with these staff eligible to receive unemployment benefits as provided in part (I); and
(3) ca\ls on the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations to note that this proposal could preserve jobs for skilled employees and help both empl9yer and employee to survive the drought period.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAX EVASION INVESTIGATION
Mr WILLIS-I refer the Treasurer to the Government's decision to appoint Mr Murray Gleeson, QC., to investigate bottom-of-theharbour tax evasion schemes and to advise on the feasibility of prosecutions under existing legislation. I ask: Is the Treasurer aware that Mr

1434 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Questions without Notice

Gleeson is well known for offering advice on tax planning, as it is euphemistically known, and that Mr Gleeson also acted for Mr Curran in his now infamous case before the High Court of Australia? In view of Mr Gleeson's reported doubts as to the possibility of prosecutions, is the Treasurer completely satisfied that Mr Gleeson is offering totally objective advice on this matter and, in particular, that Mr Gleeson has not in the past offered advice to anyone taking part in a bottom-of-the-harbour scheme?
Mr HOWARD-The question asked by the honourable member for Gellibrand takes this debate into a newer and lower dimension. Mr Murray Gleeson is a person whom I have known for a number of years. I regard him not only as a lawyer of outstanding competence but also as a person of honour and integrity. I regard him as a lawyer who will give accurate, competent and fearless advice to anybody who instructs him. He was responsible for advising the Government, in company with other people, on the drafting of Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, the new general anti-avoidance section. I believe that the question asked by the honourable member for Gellibrand is a dishonourable one and takes this debate into a newer and lower dimension.
TRADE LIBERALISATION
Mr SHACK-I address my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. I refer to Australia's plans for trade liberalisation, first announced by the Prime Minister last May, to coincide with the Versailles summit conference. I ask: Is it a fact that there is a mounting fear on the part of some nations that if the current tide of protectionism is not turned the world may be heading for a financial and trade catastrophe? Is it also a fact that this fear of a deepening world recession and worsening trade outlook has prompted a major reappraisal of Australia's trade proposals by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade nations? What concerns does the Minister have that in the rundown to the GATT ministerial meeting in November the European Economic Community nations may seek to water down the Australian proposals? Finally, what efforts have been made and will be made by Australia to press the argument that a freeing of trade is, along with the continued reduction of inflation, a necessary condition for renewed and long term economic growth?
Mr ANTHONY-Last week I had the opportunity of attending an informal conference at Ditchley Park which was organised by the Trade Policy Research Centre and was attended by

about 45 people from around the world. Ministers, officials, businessmen and senior executives from North America and Europe attended to discuss world economic circumstances and, particularly, trade and payments. The outcome of that meeting was: There was a real need, if we were to try to redress the inflation, unemployment and growth problems, for trade to be liberalised. There was no way in which countries, particularly developing countries, could cope with their huge indebtedness unless they had an ability to trade their way out of that indebtedness. With the strains that are now being placed on the world monetary system, it is becoming highly critical that we reverse the trend that is developing at the moment for all countries to be inward looking and to be adding additional protection measures to try to bolster their own local industries which, in the long term, will be totally counter-productive. It could be the critical thing that brings about a world depression. With the way in which the world economic circumstances are moving at the moment there is a parallel to what was happening in the late 1920s and early 1930s.
Because of this general atmosphere considerable comment was made about our Prime Minister's initiative to try to bring about a standstill on any further forms of protectionism at the GATT ministerial meeting. Of course, protectionism is very broad. It does not involve just tariffs. It involves all the non-tariff measures, the orderly marketing arrangements and the subsidies, whether they be on exports, production or credit. They are all devices which tend to distort the pattern of international trade. There was a real willingness to try to get enthusiasm at the GATT ministerial meeting so that the initiatives proposed by Australia come to some substance. I must say that there was a very ready willingness on the part of all of the countries represented. Maybe there was some reluctance on the part of some of the European countries. But generally all countries realised that if we do not move in this direction some very serious strains will be placed upon the world economic circumstances.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Duffy addressing a question to the Treasurer-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.
TOBACCO INDUSTRY
Mr EWEN CAMERON-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. I refer to the Industries Assistance Commission draft report on the Australian tobacco industry.

Questions without Notice

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1435

Do the recommendations in the draft report spell the end for tobacco growing in Australia? Is the Minister aware of the depressing economic effect that implementation of these recommendations would have on many towns and communities in Victoria, Queensland and New South Wales?
Mr NIXON-The lAC draft report on the tobacco industry certainly does propose radical changes to the assistance that has been provided to the industry-both to the growers and to the manufacturers-over a number of years. From conversations I have had I am aware that a great deal of concern has been aroused amongst growers and, I think, even on the part of manufacturers about where the lAC is leading the industry. I think I should point out to the honourable member that there is still an opportunity for both the growers and the manufacturers to make their fears known to the lAC, which is meeting in Brisbane on the 21st and 22nd of this month-in a few days time. I think it would be appropriate if they were to put forward a proper submission setting out their deep concerns about where the draft report will lead the industry. I share the honourable member's concern about the draft report and the implications for the industry. There are whole towns in various States of Australia in which the tobacco industry is a very integral part of the total economy. If the suggested draft report is accepted by the lAC as the final report it will certainly have a devastating effect. Therefore, I think it is appropriate for the industry to make its views known to the lAC.
TAX EVASION
Mr DUFFY-I address my question to the Treasurer. Is it a fact that the Treasurer is considering changing the provisions of his proposed legislation announced on 25 July to recoup tax evaded through bottom-of-the-harbour schemes, most notably by dropping the 30 per cent penalty proposed for non-payment of tax? Will these changes, if implemented, cause further delays and allow even more time, in addition to the already huge delay of nine years in some cases, to elapse before the tax is collected? Will the changes mean that persons involved in these schemes will have more time to divest themselves of assets or to leave the country to avoid paying the tax which is due?
Mr HOWARD-The final form of the legislation has still to be settled. Until the Bill is presented to the Parliament for approval there is little point in speculating about some of the finer details of it. I make it clear to the honourable gentleman that the Government intends to proceed with the thrust of my announcement made in

July. Nonetheless it is important legislation. It has properly raised some concerns and sensitivities which must be properly addressed. I believe that it is entirely consistent with adhering to the thrust of my statement of 25 July and achieving the objective of securing a balanced and equitable taxation outcome to pay regard to those sensitivities and to give proper care and attention to the preparation of this legislation.
While I am on my feet, perhaps I might have the opportunity of supplementing the answer I gave to the honourable member for Gellibrand. I would like to point out to him and to the House that a counsel engaged in Western Australia by some people who have expressed opposition to the Government's legislation, which I understand the Australian Labor Party is supporting, is none other than a Mr Ian Temby, who quite properly has given a professional opinion to the people who engaged him. Mr Ian Temby was the Australian Labor Party candidate for the seat of Nedlands after Sir Charles Court retired. According to the rationale of the honourable member for Gellibrand in the question he asked me, where does that leave Mr Temby?
STEEL INDUSTRY
Mr BAUME-My question is directed to the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce and concerns the proposed retrenchments announced by the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd yesterday. Can the action proposed to be taken by BHP be properly regarded as a result of the recent decision of the Commonwealth Government on the Temporary Assistance Authority's report on the Australian steel industry?
Mr FIFE-The Government's concern for the Australian steel industry was clearly demonstrated when it agreed to send a reference to the Temporary Assistance Authority some time ago. This reference, of course, went forward following representations from BHP because of that company's concern for the future of the industry. The Commonwealth, for its part, carefully considered the recommendations of the Temporary Assistance Authority. The Government believed that those recommendations were not sufficient to provide a reasonable level of protection for BHP until such time as the Industries Assistance Commission reported on the long term needs of that industry. It was for two reasons-firstly, to provide a breathing space and, secondly, to ensure that the flow-on effects of protection for the steel industry would not have downstream effects on other industries-that the Government took the action that it did.

1436 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Questions without Notice

I am able to advise the honourable member and the House that BHP management has assured me that its decisions announced yesterday are not directly related to the decisions of the Commonwealth Government in relation to the TAA recommendations. Those decisions, which regrettably will-mean the retrenchment of a large number of people in Newcastle and Wollongong, are decisions which BHP itself has taken and which BHP itself has had in contemplation for some time as part of its general restructuring program.
I spoke to Mr Brian Loton, the managing director of BHP, yesterday to receive further assurance that that information is factual. He reassured me of that position. I did so because of a statement that had been issued earlier in the day by the manager of the steel division in Newcastle which seemed to be at odds with what BHP had formerly told the Commonwealth Government. When I spoke to Mr Loton yesterday afternoon he reinforced what he had previously said by reminding me that the goods that were under reference to the TAA are not manufactured at the BHP steelworks in Newcastle.
The Commonwealth Government is extremely concerned about the steel industry. We would like to see it restructured in an efficient way. Australia needs and must have an efficient steel industry. But we must also ensure that any protection provided to the steel industry will not have adverse effects on other industries-on industries which manufacture goods from steel products-and other users of steel in various industries throughout Australia.
TAX AVOIDANCE SCHEMES
Mr DAWKINS-I refer the Treasurer to the question asked by the honourable member for Hunter on 17 August concerning the continued membership of the Australian Industry Development Corporation of a person who is known to have participated in bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes. Following the disclosure that the AIDC has itself been engaging in tax avoidance, was this person's expertise in this area the reason for his original appointment? If not, and following the Prime Minister's declaration on radio on Sunday that all participants in these schemes knew that what they were doing was wrong, why does the Treasurer continue to provide official sanctuary and official condonation to this Liberal Party fund raiser . .
Mr Dawkins continuing to direct a question to the Treasurer-
Mr SPEAKER-The question is--

Mr Birney-It is out of order.
Mr SPEAKER-I assure the honourable member for Phillip that I do not need his assistance. The question is out of order in the area where it made assertions-particularly in the last sentence. I will allow the earlier part of the question which seeks information to stand. But I require Hansard to note that the latter part of the question is out of order. I call the Treasurer.
Mr HOWARD-In answer to the honourable member for Hunter on 17 August I said that the mere naming of people in reports ought not of itself constitute grounds for the removal of people from bodies. I then made the point in reply to the honourable member for Hunter that the Government had decided to introduce legislation to recoup the tax that had been evaded in respect of these schemes; that that legislation would fall where it might and that it would fall on people who met the criteria of the legislation, irrespective of the identity of those people. I make it plain to the honourable member and to all other honourable members opposite that no quarter will be given to anybody, according to political or other affiliation, by that legislation. It is patently clear from the pattern of questions that have been asked so far today that the Australian Labor Party has run out of substance and argument on this issue and has now descended to the level of character assassination.
Mr Dawkins-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I take great offence at the Treasurer's remarks. The point is that the Prime Minister has said that this man and other men are guilty. The Treasurer continues to have this man as a member of an important body under his control.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. He raises a point of argument, not a point of order.
ANZUS TREATY
Mr WHITE-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to claims made in recent debates that the ANZUS treaty is essentially a military alliance in which Australia plays a purely subordinate role. Is the Minister aware of comments on the ANZUS alliance made by President Reagan during the recent presentation of credentials by Australia's new Ambassador to Washington, Sir Robert Cotton? If he is aware of them, will he inform the House of the contents of those remarks?
Mr STREET-The Australian Ambassador to the United States of America, Sir Robert Cotton, presented his credentials to President Reagan on the afternoon of 8 September. The President's reply to the Ambassador's remarks on that

Questions without Notice

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1437

occasion amounted to a significant policy statement on the strength and purpose of relations between Australia and the United States. The President expressed appreciation for Australia's active and important role in advancing Western interests not only in the Asian region but also on a wider world scale. As the honourable member rightly said, he described the ANZUS alliance as being more than a military partnership. He said that it has political and economic dimensions which have become deeply enmeshed in the fabric of the national policy planning of the United States.
In acknowledging the remarks of the Ambassador, the President indicated an understanding that differences can and do arise between our two countries. These can be resolved as between equal partners and friends. Significantly, the President reaffirmed profound respect for Australia's independence and integrity. He said that the United States welcomed Australia's views on issues affecting our common interests. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the remarks exchanged on the presentation of credentials.
Leave granted.
The document read asJol/ows-
Remarks by the Ambassador of Australia, Sir Robert Cotton, KCMG, on the occasion of the presentation of letters of
credence to the President of the United States of America 8 September 1982
Mr President,
I am deeply honoured to present to you today letters from Her Majesty Elizabeth II, Queen of Australia, accrediting me to you as ambassador extraordinary and of Australia and recalling my predecessor, His Excellency Sir Nicholas Parkinson. As I thus embark on my duties as Australia's Ambassador to you and your great country, where I have many friends, I am very conscious of the importance and gravity of the task that confronts me.
Australia and the United States have national interests, the pursuit of which is the familiar day to day work of diplomats. Both our countries share values, which are entrenched in our respective political, economic and social systems and are the legacy of a rich western democratic tradition which emphasises social justice and liberty for all within the rule of law. We, like you, have a federal system of government and our constitution owes much to the framers of the United States Constitution.
Australians and Americans share the recognition that it requires strength and vigilance to preserve our traditions in a world in which such basic traditions are regarded by some with implacable animosity. In the second half of the 20th century it has fallen to America, because of its ideals, unique size and strength, to bear much of the burden of defending our traditional way of life, but I assure you, Mr President, that it is a burden which we in Australia willingly recognise must be shared. I trust that our actions as a member of the western alliance have proved this to you and to your people.
The partnership between Australia and the United States is many-sided and rich in its diversity. It is a security relationship through the ANZUS alliance: A trade and financial relationship of size and consequence which profits both our peoples:

A network of communication between scientists, artists, academics, businessmen, political leaders and Australians and Americans in all walks of life and a relationship of the closest consultation on international political issues and problems. I intend, therefore, to travel widely through the United States to ensure that I am fully informed on our whole range of interests.
Even a relationship as excellent as ours, Mr President, will witness occasional differences of perception or of interest, sometimes important ones, neither government would expect it to be otherwise. The United States is a global superpower and an economic giant. Australia is a middle power, albeit, we believe, an increasingly active one with major foreign policy, trade and financial interest in Asia and the Pacific, a region which we believe is of rapidly growing significance in the world. Our commercial interests, naturally, will sometimes be in competition with those of the United States, there will be sometimes also issues distant from our own shores on which we can lend the United States active support (for example Poland, Afghanistan or the Sinai), but as a practical matter this will not always be the case. Australians are an independent people who want to make up their own minds and again I am sure, Mr President, that you would not wish it otherwise. If differences do arise I am sure, Mr President, that we should be able to deal with them sensibly and expeditiously as within a family as we have done in the past.
Mr President, I bring you the warmest greetings of my Prime Minister, the Right Honourable Malcolm Fraser, who sets great store by the close relationship that he has with you. I look forward to playing my part in sustaining and fostering that relationship which epitomizes the natural alliance and ties that exist between our two countries. With keen anticipation I welcome the opportunities that I shall have of working closely with the members of your Cabinet and administration in giving life and substance to the links that bind Australia to the United States of America.
In conclusion, Mr President, I extend to you and Mrs Reagan, your gracious wife, the personal good wishes of my wife and myself. And through you I extend those wishes to the American government and people.
The President's reply to the remarks of the newly appointed Ambassador of Australia Sir Robert Carrington Cotton,
KCMG upon the occasion of the presentation of his letter of credence
Mr Ambassador:
It gives me great pleasure to accept your credentials as Ambassador of Australia. The relations between our countries are particularly close and warm. This relationship facilitates open and frequent communication between our governments, and I expect that it will continue to grow during your service in Washington.
The good relations we enjoy spring from our sharing of a similar perception of the world. We speak the same language, and we share a common heritage of political democracy and free enterprise. It is only natural that in most instances we find that we have an identity of interest and that we can work closely and harmoniously toward a common goa\.
A manifestation of this identity of interest is our partnership in the ANZUS alliance. The partnership is more than military. It has political and economic dimensions that have become deeply enmeshed in the fabric of our national policy planning. The ANZUS alliance has not only stood the test of time: It has become more diverse and more meaningful in protecting and defending some of our most fundamental interests. This augurs well for the future.
This Government appreciates Australia's active and important role in advancing western interests both in the Asian region and on a worldwide scale. The range of your interests

1438 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Questions without Notice

and influence is vast, and your contributions are great. Australia is a major member of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and is active in other international fora. We have noted with appreciation your support on such major international issues as Afghanistan, Poland and the Middle East. We also deeply appreciate the fact that Australia has given refuge to tens of thousands of Indochinese refugees. Your political and economic contributions to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations have made Australia a key to stability and advancement in the area. You state that Australia is a middle power, but it is clear that Australia plays an immensely greater role in world affairs than that modest appellation would suggest.
Our bilateral relations are characterized by a richness and diversity of exchanges that resist simple description. These contacts touch on all facets of our lives from the political and economic to the cultural and technological. Our open societies permit and encourage these networks of communication and exchange to flourish to the mutual benefit of the peoples of Australia and the United States.
There are, as you note, occasional differences of perception of interest. It is natural that such differences should occur even between the best of friends. Fortunately, our relationship is such that we can deal with these rare problems as equal partners and friends. This Government has a profound respect for Australia's independence and integrity and for your Government's mature judgments on world affairs, and we seek and welcome your views on issues affecting our common interests.
With full confidence that your service here will greatly benefit both our nations, I welcome you to the United States and to your high and important mission as ambassador.
TAX AVOIDANCE SCHEMES
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question. I refer to the Prime Minister's statement about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes in his electorate talk on 12 September. He stated:
I do not believe anyone could have taken part without knowing they were wrong.
He will recall declaring elsewhere that in his view people who earned money in this illicit way were engaging in theft. Therefore, I ask: Is a person who has sold to Brian Maher at least five tax defaulting companies in three States unfit to hold government office? If he is not unfit, how many companies would have to be sold in this way and how much tax would have to be evaded before the Government decided that Mr Denis Horgan should be sacked?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-What I have said about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes I am prepared to assert again and again. What has happened in relation to bottom-of-the-harbour schemes is a very simple situation in which people have gained an increased value on shares as a result of tax owed to the Commonwealth being converted into a capital gain, with a promoter getting a fee for the privilege of undertaking the operation. It may well be that somebody might not know who will be the ultimate purchaser of a company, but people are aware of the price they are being paid for the shares. That in itself should

cause most people to ask some questions. The Treasurer has made it perfectly plain that the funds will be collected. In an utterly unprecedented action, we are taking a view which involves the introduction of legislation clearly with a retrospective element but not as retrospective as is sometimes suggested. We will collect the tax that would otherwise have been paid by the company if it had not been evaded by a device. We will collect that tax from those who have profited from that transaction.
In addition, it is worth noting that the Treasurer introduced and the House passed legislation in 1980 which introduced criminal penalties for schemes of this kind. That puts a particular connotation on schemes of this kind which may not apply in relation to other avoidance measures. The Leader of the Opposition asserted facts of which I am not aware. The Leader of the Opposition and other members of his party have continued to assert that because a name might be named in a report that is in itself evidence of guilt. The Leader of the Opposition is all too ready and all too willing to use this Parliament in that way. He did it in relation to what he later denied but which at the time was taken by many reputable journalists as the naming of certain categories of people in secret sections of the Costigan report. The depths to which this Leader of the Opposition can sink can be gauged by the comments that he made about Senator Durack this morning. How many people in the Labor Party are prepared to support him in his attitude and his remarks in relation to Senator Durack, that Senator Durack's illness has been caused by conscience? If they are let them stand and be counted and be condemned.
FFG-TYPE FRIGATES
Mr KATTER-I ask the Right Honourable Minister for Defence whether in the light of Press comment on the weekend regarding the FFGtype frigates he can advise of their present capabilities and future equipment program. Does he regard them as a good acquisition for the Royal Australian Navy?
Mr SINCLAIR-Following the visit by the Prime Minister to HMAS Canberra, one of the new FFG frigates, on Friday the Weekend Australian published a report that I understand was presented by a cadet reporter of that newspaper that totally misrepresented statements, made in a briefing to the media representatives who attended, by Commander Bryan Wilson, the commander of that ship. To date-it surely was not published this morning-there has been no retraction of that report by that newspaper. I am

Questions without Notice

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1439

grateful to the honourable gentleman for giving me an opportunity to state that Commander Bryan Wilson denies the substance of most of the statements in that Weekend Australian report. Commander Bryan Wilson also points out that the capability of his ship is such that it certainly is a very worthwhile addition to the Australian fleet.
It is, of course, a new generation of frigate. As such it is equipped with a number of items which are significantly in advance of their predecessors. It is one of a class of 28 ships that were built, three of them for the Royal Australian Navy and the balance for the United States Navy. They are all to be retro-fitted with stabilisers when a suitable stabiliser design has been developed. I have already announced that there is to be on that ship and her sister ship a phalanx retro-fitted when she next goes in for refit. There is also to be acquired for the Royal Australian Navy a general purpose helicopter. In the meantime the French Squirrel helicopter is to be used on an interim arrangement. The present state of play is that there is to be an evaluation of a number of helicopter types to determine the best fleet utility aircraft that can be used for the wide range of applications necessary for the Royal Australian Navy.
The report in the Weekend Australian suggested that in some way the equipment and armaments of HMAS Canberra and other FFG ships are inadequate. I assure honourable members that that is not so. Indeed, she is a modern and adequate ship which is making a very worthwhile contribution to the Royal Australian Naval fleet.
IMPORTATION OF SPANISH AIRCRAFT
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I refer the Treasurer to a question I asked on 24 August in relation to the importation of a Spanish aircraft by a Melbourne aviation company. At that time. I asked:
Did the Australian Taxation Office give a clearance to the importers to declare the aircraft to be new? Was the Taxation Office aware that the aircraft was declared at Customs as a demonstration aircraft? Is it a fact that the aircraft first flew in 1978? Is it a fact that the aircraft was originally an armed forces aircraft in Spain? What criteria did the Taxation Office refer to in declaring the aircraft to be new?
The Treasurer said:
I am not in a position to answer that question today; I hope to be so tomorrow.
Is the Treasurer in a position to answer the question now? If not, why not?
Mr HOWARD-I apologise to the honourable member for not having answered it when I previously indicated. My understanding is that the provisions of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act would preclude the Commissioner from providing the detail that has been sought by the

honourable gentleman. I will check that again with the Commissioner this afternoon. I understand further that a statement on the matter was issued by people connected with the company which refuted the claims made by the honourable member.
PERTH DEPUTY CROWN SOLICITOR'S OFFICE
Mr CONNOLLY-The Acting Attorney General will recall that the Attorney-General in his statement on matters arising from the report on the Costigan Royal Commission said that there was a need for an external examination of the Perth Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office. Can he advise the House whether any such action has been taken to have such an examination undertaken?
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is true that the Costigan Royal Commission report drew attention to deficiencies in various aspects of the Perth Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office. The Government announced very promptly that it was setting about remedying those deficiencies which had been highlighted by the report. It is true, as the honourable member says, that the Attorney General in his statement on this matter indicated that there was clearly a case for an external examination. The President of the Law Society of Australia was invited to nominate a suitably qualified solicitor to conduct an examination and investigation of the Perth office to see what steps should be taken to improve the professional quality of the work being conducted in that office and to ensure that the office provided proper and adequate professional advice to other client departments of the Commonwealth Government.
I am happy to be able to inform the honourable member that the President of the Law Society nominated a Melbourne solicitor, Mr Tony Smith, to conduct that work. He started yesterday and will be devoting himself virtually full time to the work until it is concluded. I can assure the honourable member and the House that when his recommendations are made and when his report is given we will certainly take all those steps that are necessary to be taken to ensure beyond any doubt whatsoever that the conduct of legal advice and other legal activities in the office are of a very high standard indeed, that there is a proper working relationship between the Central Office of the Crown Solicitor's Office and the Perth office and that all client departments are served properly by the Perth office and indeed for that matter by all Deputy Crown Solicitors' offices. There should be no doubt that the Government acknowledges the shortcomings that were highlighted in respect of

1440 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Questions without Notice

that matter by the Costigan Royal Commission report. We have set about in a genuine and serious way to rectify those shortcomings. We certainly will not stop until all those shortcomings are rectified and the standard of advice and conduct of work in the office are of a very high standard indeed.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Campbell having addressed a question to the Prime Minister--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.
LOAN COUNCIL
Mr STEELE HALL-I direct a question to the Treasurer. On 23 February last I asked the Treasurer whether he would table the terms of reference under which a committee was set up to study the future of the Loan Council. I also asked who the members of that committee are, when it will report and to whom. Does the Treasurer now have that information?
Mr HOWARD-I am able to table a statement that I made on 19 February 1982 which contains the original terms of reference and also the revised terms of reference of the inquiry into the operations of the Loan Council. I apologise to the honourable member for not having tabled it immediately he asked his question, although the substance of it had been made public in a Press statement after the Premiers Conference or Loan Council meeting. The members of the committee of inquiry are, in effect, the head of the Commonwealth Treasury and the Under-Treasurer of each of the six States. The committee's work is fairly well advanced. It is my understanding that it will be going to the members of the Loan Council probably within the next two to three months. As I know that the honourable gentleman is particularly interested in the operations of the Loan Council and in Commonwealth-State financial matters, I will keep him informed of further progress in compiling the report.
TAX EVASION
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I refer to his very lengthy statement in June of this year following the publication of the McCabe-Lafranchi report. In that statement the honourable gentleman said that he was unable to give any information about tax evasion matters, particularly the Perth case, because of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Is it not a fact that McCabe and Lafranchi were unable to get any correspondence from the Australian Taxation Office in Perth in respect of a

matter because the office relied on that section of the Act? In the light of that statement, I ask: How is it that yesterday afternoon the Treasurer held a Press conference and indicated to the Press that seven bottom-of-the-harbour tax evasion cases were now being investigated by the Australian Federal Police and, further, that in two of those cases the amount of tax involved was $4.9m and $2m? Would it not have been of assistance if this Parliament had had this information in respect of other cases? Accordingly, has the Treasurer changed his mind as to how the secrecy provisions of the Act now might be deemed to apply?
Mr HOWARD-The answer is no. I have indicated that I was not aware of the circumstances that have ultimately been revealed as having occurred in the Perth office of the Deputy Crown Solicitor because, apart from the reference in the minute of 24 May 1978 which I read into Hansard on 25 August last, my attention had not been drawn by the Taxation Office to any matter that could have put me reasonably on inquiry that those cases were in fact taking place. There is no inconsistency between that situation and my being informed by the Taxation Office over the last week that seven cases have been sent to the police for investigation for possible breaches of the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 and the amounts in question being supplied to me by the Taxation Office.
TELEVISION SERVICE FOR THE DEAF
Mr ADERMANN-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. Although the establishment of the Australian Caption Centre is a step in the right direction towards providing television for the deaf and hearing impaired, is there any real hope that the deaf and hearing impaired will ever be able to receive a full and adequate television service? If so, when?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member has long been an advocate in the cause of those who are deaf or have imperfections in hearing and who are thereby prevented in many ways from leading a full and enjoyable life. It is in no small measure due to him and others that society's attention has been drawn to such matters as how television can be improved so that the deaf and hearing impaired may have access to it and use it in the same way as do other people. The honourable member referred-I am grateful to him for doing so-to the Australian Caption Centre, for which the Commonwealth Government has made available large sums, both to establish it and to enable it to get its operations under way. Indeed, that Centre was opened very recently by the

Questions without Notice

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1441

Prime Minister. We have also made funds available to the Australian Broadcasting Commission so that, I expect, by March or April next year at least a large number of ABC programs will be captioned. This is a form of printing which can be read by the deaf or hearing impaired.
There are really two outstanding problems in providing a full and completely adequate television service for the deaf and hearing impaired. The first concerns the standard to be used in Australia for the technical mechanism to produce the captioning. That is being investigated now as a matter of urgency and I am confident that very soon I will be able to make a significant announcement with respect to the standard that will prevail in Australia. The second problem can really be posed in the form of a question: How can we also encourage the commercial television stations to adopt a form of closed captioning for the deaf and hearing impaired? Likewise, I am confident that by one means or another we can achieve that very desirable objective.
The question has been raised as to whether an inquiry by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal would be a desirable mechanism to examine that issue further. I am likewise looking at that very closely at the moment. I am confident that very soon I will be able to make an announcement with respect to whether it is practicable and the most desirable course to follow to have such an inquiry conducted by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. I assure the honourable member that there is a great conviction in the Government that we will take every step possible to ensure that a proper and adequate television service is available which will provide full and complete services that can be enjoyed to the utmost by the deaf and hearing impaired.
TAX EVASION
Mr YOUNG-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, is supplementary to the question that has been asked both of him and of the Treasurer about people who have been mentioned in reports as being involved in bottom-of the-harbour schemes holding government positions. I refer the Prime Minister to his action in late 1977 when, as a result of his Deputy and Treasurer being mentioned in a report on the Victorian land scandals, he took action to remove his Deputy and Treasurer from office. What has happened in the meantime that he would take that action against his Deputy in 1977 but now will not take action against appointees to government boards who have been mentioned as being involved in bottom-of-the-harbour schemes?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman might well recall that Sir Phillip was very ill at the time; he was in hospital. An election had been called and he and the Government wanted to make quite sure that the election issues focused on the matters of substance that were before the Australian people and not on the false red herring circumstances relating to Sir Phillip himself. As a result of that Sir Phillip stood aside until the matters were totally cleared, which was after the election. The electors of Australia focused on the issues before them and they defeated the Australian Labor Party totally and absolutely, as they will at the next election.
ORGANISED CRIME
Mr GROOM-My question is directed to the Minister for Administrative Services as the Minister responsible for the Australian Federal Police. I refer to a statement made by an honourable member in this House on 7 September alleging that three knights were involved in organised crime in Australia. In view of the grave nature of the allegations, has the honourable member concerned provided to officers of the Australian Federal Police the names of those involved or any evidence whatsoever to support his allegations? Do the Australian Federal Police have any evidence of criminal activities by knights of the realm? If so, what action is being taken to bring those involved to justice?
Mr NEWMAN-I recall the Leader of the Opposition making those allegations last week. I might say that the opportunity was given to him to name those people and to give evidence about them; but, of course, he did not avail himself of that opportunity. As far as I know he has not given any information to the Australian Federal Police. I should have thought that, given the very strong language used last week by the honourable member for Wills in regard to people who use privilege in this House to make unsubstantiated allegations and who are not prepared to do likewise outside this House, he would have made haste to correct that position. As to evidence held by the AFP about any knights of the realm who may be involved in criminal activities, I am advised by the Acting Commissioner of the AFP that he has not had any such evidence.
PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports has indicated to me that he wishes to ask for detailed information relating to the administration of the Parliamentary Library.

1442 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Personal Explanations

Mr HOLDING-Mr Speaker, I seek information relating to the position of the Parliamentary Librarian.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable member to hand his request to the Clerk. If it is in order it will appear in Hansard. In due course I will reply and that reply will be included in Hansard.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 25 of the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973, I present the Commonwealth Grants Commission's third report 1982 on special assistance for the Northern Territory.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 25 of the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973 I present the Commonwealth Grants Commission's forty-ninth report 1982 on special assistance for States.
TRADE PRACTICES COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)~Pursuant to section 171 of the Trade Practices Act 1974, I present the annual report of the Trade Practices Commission for 1981-82.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the Leader of the Opposition claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HAYDEN-Yes, Mr Speaker. I claim to have been misrepresented by the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) and Commonwealth building cleaning operations. The Minister referred to a comment I made last week in the House in a way which was intended at least to imply that there were doubts as to whether there was any substance in what I referred to. My reference was to three knights being involved in organised crime. On 12 September an article appeared in the Sunday Telegraph under the heading 'Knights in Secret "Blue Book" '. It was written by Mr Bob Bottom who is, presumably, one of the newspaper's senior journalists but was formerly a special crime investigator employed in New South Wales. I quote briefly from that article, which states:

A secret report is held by federal authorities on extensive inquiries made into the activities of three knights.
The report, entitled 'The Knights', was prepared by Australian Federal Police for the Williams Royal Commission into Drugs.
The article goes on:
The police squad operated from secret premises in Sydney throughout 1978 and 1978.
I presume that was 1979. I merely draw the attention of the House to this report. It confirms information informally but reliably given to me from several police sources and which, I repeat, the Minister and I discussed in this House one evening after the dinner break. In that respect, Mr Speaker, I draw your attention to another misrepresentation where the Minister sought to deny my assertion in Parliament last week. Unfortunately I do not have the record immediately at hand, but if the Minister cares to make an issue of it I will have it retrieved promptly. The House will recall that when a question was asked simultaneously of the Minister and the then Senator Webster about delays in declaration of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park area they gave conflicting responses. Subsequently this Minister had dinner with several journalists and said he changed his story to save the Government, even though--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. The honourable gentleman has gone far beyond the bounds of a personal explanation.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Mr Speaker, with your leave I would like to respond to the points raised by the Leader of the Opposition. They need correction.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the Minister claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr NEWMAN-Yes, I do.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister may make a personal explanation.
Mr NEWMAN-There are two points in relation to which I claim to have been misrepresented. The first point concerns the last part of what the Leader of the Opposition said. He knows who is tel1ing lies in this place. I said immediately after Question Time last week that I denied completely-I do it again now-that the Leader of the Opposition has ever discussed with me three knights of the realm--
Mr Hayden-Not even one?
Mr NEWMAN-Involved in organised crime. On this second more substantial part--
Mr Hayden-I understand he is now saying one.

Personal Explanations

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1443

Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-What a quibble. Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition continually interjects. I indicate to him that the Parliament is not here for his exclusive use. Other members have the right to be heard. Mr NEWMAN-More importantly, the Leader of the Opposition chose to make an explanation substantiating his allegations about the knights by referring to an article in, I think, the Sunday Telegraph of last week. I think it is important now to make the record clear about that matter. I am advised by the Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police that there is a so called blue book. That blue book was an intelligence briefing provided to the Williams Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs. It was prepared by a group of AFP which was helping the Royal Commission in its inquiries. The brief was tendered by Inspector Lamb of the AFP. It was not a brief of evidence. It was an intelligence brief given in open hearing but as a confidential document and it remains a confidential document of the Royal Commission. I stress again that the report was not a brief of evidence. It was a summary of information which arose out of allegations concerning certain individuals who appeared before or were investigated by the Royal Commission. At the conclusion of the Royal Commission the group continued to investigate matters which the Royal Commissioner had asked about and had specifically referred to the group as a result of the Royal Commission. Some of these matters had their origins in the intelligence brief provided by the Royal Commission. Others arose from proceedings before the Commission. The situation with the work of that group is that some of those allegations which were provided to the Royal Commission have been found to be false. Some are already in the courts awaiting prosecution and some have been referred to the joint task force in New South Wales which is looking into drugs generally. The important thing about the explanation is this: As a result of an inquiry I made, having read the article, the Australian Federal Policethat is, the Acting Commissioner-has advised me that there is no evidence in those briefs which involves any knights of the realm.
TABLING OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman
may proceed. Mr UREN (Reid)-Last week a government
report was made available to the Press. To date it

has not been tabled in this Parliament. That report is the report of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry. That report revealed that there will be only 118,000 commencements this year when, in fact, the capacity of the industry is 150,060 commencements in this country. Frankly, I think it is up to the Government, if it receives government reports while the Parliament is sitting, to make sure that those reports are made available to this Parliament. It is not good enough for this Parliament that the Government makes these facts available to the Press and yet does not make these facts available to the House. Mr Speaker, I am asking you to make sure that the Government faces up to its responsibilities of presenting government reports to this Parliament when Parliament is sitting.
Mr SPEAKER-I will make inquiries about the particular report. Therefore, I cannot speak about the report at present. But I think it is highly desirable that reports be presented to the Parliament while the Parliament is sitting. Quite clearly, if the Parliament is not sitting the report ought not to be held up until the Parliament sits. When the Parliament is sitting where possible the House has always asked-it can do no more than askthat Ministers, in fact, table the reports in the Parliament.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS Mr Cunningbam-Mr Speaker-Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for McMillan has been standing up-Mr Cunningbam-I claim to have been misrepresented. Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable member had indicated his intention to me earlier I would have known the purpose for his standing. I indicate to him that it is the practice in the House for an honourable member to let the Speaker know that he wishes to make a personal explanation. I will call him on this occasion. Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan)-I claim to have been misrepresented by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his answer to my question. Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman wishes to make a personal explanation. He may proceed. Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Treasurer at the end of his non-answer to my question said that a statement had been made in relation to what I was asking about. He said that statement had been put out by Mr Tony Staley, a former Minister in this Government, claiming that what I have said and what I am claiming is incorrect. I wish to point out to this Parliament that the Treasurer is

1444 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Personal Explanations

misrepresenting what I am saying. I have asked him the question now on two occasions. He has not answered it. I have here a report which clearly indicates the question I asked. The evidence is here that the aircraft I am talking about was four years old and had been painted. Mr Staley has put out a statement saying that a director had resigned for the good of the company. He did resign. As I understand it his deputy chairman has also resigned. The facts I am seeking from the Treasurer are correct. Secondhand machinery is being sold for taxation purposes.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now going beyond a personal explanation and is debating the matter.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I am making the point that the Treasurer did use the opportunity, in answering the question, to say that I had been shown to be incorrect by a statement made by Mr Staley. I am pointing out-and I have the evidence here-that Mr Staley does not know what he is speaking about. I ask that this document be incorporated in Hansard.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman asks leave to incorporate a document in Hansard. Is leave granted? This requires the assent of all members of the House. Someone has said 'no' and, therefore, leave is not granted.
Sir James Killen-I raise a point of order. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) asked for a statement to be incorporated in Hansard. This statement runs into some eight pages. I explicitly refuse the request. I take this opportunity of saying to the House that I adhere closely to the precedent laid down by the late Speaker, Mr Cameron-namely, that statements that are to be included in Hansard should not expressly lengthen the speech. An explanatory table is one thing, but I rega.-d the inclusion of some eight pages as being completely unacceptable to the Parliament.
Mr Cunningham-Could I seek permission to have it tabled?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for McMillan is asking leave to table the document. Is leave granted? There being no dissenting voice, leave is granted.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) claims my attention. Is she taking a point of order?
Mrs Child-I would like your advice.
Mr SPEAKER-Are you asking for my indulgence?
Mrs Child-For your indulgence.

Mr SPEAKER-I give the honourable member my indulgence.
Mrs Child-Three weeks ago in Question Time I asked a question of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Twice during his attempt to answer the question he said that he would see that I had correct information without delay. Mr Speaker, could you tell me how I go about getting that information?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member has made her point. I cannot give her information. I have no authority in that matter.
CUSTOMS AND EXCISE AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
AUSTRALIAN STEEL INDUSTRY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Fraser Government's culpable negligence in its failure to reverse the decline in Australian steel industry employment.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (2.50)-1 bring a matter of grave concern to the attention of the Parliament. Australia's steel industry, the cornerstone of Australia's manufacturing industry, is in grave trouble and the lives of thousands of Australians are consequently adversely affected in a very tragic way. Whichever angle one takes in looking at this serious problem, most of the blame can be, and must be, sheeted home to the Fraser Government, firstly, because of its culpable negligence, in allowing general economic activity to sink to its present abysmally low levels and, secondly, because it is not involving itself in the investment decision making of this vital and prominent industry and has not done so for the years it should have.
Let me firstly state a few facts about the decline in employment. The Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd shed about 3,000 steelworkers in its financial year ended 31 May 1982. Its total work force had dropped to about 72,350 at the end of that financial year. At the time of its annual report a few weeks ago when it made these announcements it

Australian Steel Industry

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1445

had already forecast further job losses of between 2,500 and 3,000. Yesterday's announcements of a reduction of the work force in Newcastle of 1,735, a reduction of the work force in Port Kembla of 950 and further threats to Whyalla are in addition to previous announcements made by BHP. By the end of 1982 BHP's work force in its Newcastle steelworks will have fallen by 3,550 or 31 per cent from the level of 11,550 which existed in March 1981. The Port Kembla situation is even worse. These facts add up to a steel industry facing its most serious crisis since the late 1920s. They also add up to yet another giant bungle on the part of our present national Government in Canberra in allowing this situation to develop.
I cannot move away from stating the dimensions of this problem without talking about the multiplier effect of the retrenchments and job losses on the regions affected. It is said in Newcastle, for instance, that for every job lost in the steel industry directly another two jobs are lost elsewhere in that community. Responsible unions in Newcastle are saying, for instance, that a total of 5,000 jobs will go in subsidiary and supply industries as a result of the latest cutbacks. It is known that 426 companies which supply goods and services worth $150m per annum to the Newcastle works are badly affected by the decisions announced yesterday.
The situation is equally grave in the Wollongong-Port Kembla region, where unemployment is already over 13 per cent. Similarly, the Whyalla region-I have said this already but I repeat it-is under grave threat in a district where few alternative jobs are available to people who want to live in that region, whose houses are there and who should have the opportunity of remainingthere.
All this is symptomatic of the grave depression conditions to which the Fraser Government's economic policies have allowed this country's economy to sink. The unemployment figures grow worse every month to unprecedentedly high levels. We suffer from an evil theory called monetarism. It has been practised in Australia by the political opponents of the Australian Labor Party-the Fraser Government-for over six and a half years now. Credit is kept short and its price is at usurious levels. Interest rates-that is, the price of credit-are at disastrously and unprecedentedly high levels. People are frightened for their jobs. There is an air of insecurity in the community. Retail spending is low. There is no investment to talk about. A general lack of confidence is prevailing in the community. I do not like giving publicity to this gloom and doom but unless we speak out and tell the truth in this

Parliament, unless we face the facts as they arethe facts are as I have just stated them-we will not achieve a change of economic strategy. Perhaps by a change of government we will be able to achieve that change which this country so desperately needs.
These facts about the disastrously low level of ecomomic activity in this country that I have stated are very pertinent to the subject before this House today. It is admitted that the downturn in Newcastle steel demand is related to the downturn in Australia's domestic construction industry which, of course, is due to the low level of economic activity generally. Who is to blame for that downturn in domestic demand? Who is it, if it is not the Government which has ruled over us for so long? Clearly, it is those who have responsibility for the overall economic policies who are to blame for the downturn in the construction industry. This Fraser Government has now presented seven Budgets to this nation. It has had stewardship of Australia's economic policies for over six and a half years. We of the Labor Party have been condemning the contractionary nature of the Liberal and National Country Parties' macroeconomic policies for all those years. It is absurd for the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Fife) who is at the table and who, I understand, will reply to me in this debate to seek to avoid blame for what is happening in Newcastle on the grounds that it is nothing to do with imports. I know that he gave an answer along those lines in Question Time today. I repeat: It is absurd to try to get away from the blame for what is going on in Newcastle by saying that it is nothing to do with the Temporary Assistance Authority decision or the Government's decision arising out of the TAA report. The blame must be sheeted home to the Minister and his Government because it has everything to do with the general level of economic activity. He and his Government are responsible for that general level of economic activity. At this point I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which I have shown the Minister setting out the employment losses to the BHP steel division at Newcastle and Port Kembla and another table about the closures.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

1446 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Australian Steel Industry

Table 1
EMPLOYMENT LOSS AT BHP STEEL DIVISION NEWCASTLE/PORT KEMBLA

Newcastle Port Kembla

Employment loss to date
Future retrenchments announced 14.9.82

1,730

2,025

(March 1981- (Sept. 18, 1981-

Sept. 14, 1982) Sept. 14, 1982)

1,730

950

TOTAL:

3,460

2,975

Total 3,755
2,680 6,435

Table 2
CLOSURES AND OPERATING REDUCTIONS AT BHP STEEL DIVISION NEWCASTLE/PORT KEMBLA

Newcastle

Port Kembla

Already closed

I Blast furnace I Coke oven

Future closures announced 14.9.82

No.3 Blast furnace No.2 Coke ovens
battery
No. I Bloom mill Continuous mill Brick plant
Brass foundry

Reduced operating levels

Nos I, 2and 3 Blast furnaces
No.2 Open hearth Rail mill Rail finishing plant No. I Coke ovens
battery No. I Merchant mill
Hot strip mill Flat products slab
yard Plate finishing No. I Steel plant

Mr HURFORD-Labor has an alternative economic strategy to offer to the Australian people. It is worth reminding the House and the people of what that strategy is. It is an expansionary budgeting and monetary strategy built on the base of a prices and incomes agreement. It is a policy which holds direct hope for stimulating the housing and construction industries of this country. It is a policy which holds direct hope for steel production in Newcastle after a lack of demand for that construction industry right now. As well, it offers hope for an economic revival for the rest of our Australian nation. It is a policy which will encourage investment. It will mean that we will be in readiness for the world economic recovery which we all hope is not far away.
Before leaving the subject of the international economic scene I am bound to point out that a great deal of the blame for the low level of world economic activity must be sheeted home to monetarists. The evil monetarists, theories are called Reaganomics in the United States of America.
Mr Morris-This Prime Minister supports it.

Mr HURFORD-The Prime Minister supports flat monetarist Reaganomics.
Mr Morris-And Thatcherism.
Mr HURFORD-It is called Thatcherism in the United Kingdom. The Prime Minister supports it in the United Kingdom as well. In both cases those policies have had disastrous effects on those countries and on the rest of the world. The United States and the United Kingdom are among the world engine economies. When they are adversely affected by monetarism so is the rest of the world. Let us fight the monetarism evil wherever it raises its ugly head. Let us lay blame where it should be laid-at the feet of all monetarists. Imports being dumped on this country are a grave problem also. They are a problem directly for the steel industry in the Wollongong and Port Kembla region. Inasmuch as they affect the overall profitability of steel they are a problem for every part of BHP's steel division. If there were overall profitability in the steel division I like to think that workers would have been carried in Newcastle by BHP at least until the election of a Labor Government-in other words, until the upturn comes. Therefore, it is not even valid for the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce to suggest that the import quota decisions arising from the TAA inquiry have not affected Newcastle directly.
The point I am making is that for the Acting Minister to suggest that the Government's decision on import quotas arising out of the TAA report was not responsible for all the job losses announced yesterday is a double absurdity. The inadequate Government response, allowing imports to flow in at record levels, makes it as responsible for the further 1,735 job losses announced in Newcastle yesterday as it was for the 950 job losses announced in Port Kembla. Not only is the Government responsible for the total inadequacy of its overall economic policies and the effect they are having, it is also responsible for the fact that its import quotas decision has made the BHP steel division unprofitable, with the consequent effects on Newcastle, Port Kembla and Whyalla that have been announced to us.
I remind the House of the import quotas decision. The Government is allowing steel imports to flow into this country in the current 1982-83 year at the record 1981-82 levels. The overall demand is down drastically in 1982-83. Therefore the total cut in demand comes out of Australian steel production. Of course, the dire consequence is the job losses announced yesterday, which we are debating today. Labor's policy is first of all to explore the possibility of bounties to substitute for

Australian Steel Industry

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1447

the quotas on items which come under the TAA reference. We believe insufficient examination of that policy option has been carried out. We are not committed to that; we believe it ought to be examined further. We are advised that the cost would be about one-third of the bounty costs properly allowed in the case of textiles, clothing and footwear industries. Further, we believe the cost in a full year would be about one-quarter of the amounts put aside-a conservative estimate is $100m-for what the Government is making available without means test for those who suffer from the drought. I make it quite clear that I support means tested drought relief. Equally, I support funds being made available to prevent steel industry job losses and to relieve the thousands of families so affected. This option of bounties could not be an open-ended one but could be put in place only if it benefited steel users directly. We are concerned at the adverse effects on jobs downstream of any policies which add more than is necessary to the price of steel.
If the bounty option is not possible then we commit ourselves to a quota policy which would result in imports being allowed in at a level equal to the average percentage level of the last three years. There is no reason why all the reduction in demand for steel should come out of Australian production. Further, we would put into place some prices monitoring to ensure that steel users are not taken to the cleaners by importers and BHP. In addition, I make it clear that any help we would give would be in return for commitments from BHP that employment changes would be properly planned and organised and not be the subject of sudden announcements such as the announcement that was made yesterday.
Although with justification my wrath is focused at the present time on the Government because of its disastrous macroeconomic and import quota policies, I believe BHP too must take some of the blame. Quality, reliability, delivery and competitiveness in price are all keys to success. In all of those areas BHP has been found wanting. Of course there should have been far more investment in new technology than there has been in recent years. Of course BHP has relatively neglected its steel division because it found more glamour and bigger profits in its oil and gas areas. The community is now the loser. We are left with this disastrous situation we now have on our hands.
It was the pot calling the kettle black when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) poured scorn only on the BHP directors. It is also the responsibility of government to see that there is proper investment in the steel industry; to see that

it is investing in new competitiveness. I blame the Government not only for the overall level of economic activity in this community and the effect that has had on retrenchments, the jobs losses that we have had announced to us, but I also blame the Government for not being involved, as a Labor government would be, in the investments decision-making of the steel industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation and Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce) (3.5)-1 welcome this opportunity to explain again for the benefit of the House, for the benefit of the nation-particularly those people who work in the steel industry-and in particular for the benefit of the Opposition, the background to the Government's decision on steel, the nature of that decision and its implications. We have just listened to the honourable member for Adeaide (Mr Hurford) who is the Opposition's spokesman on industry and commerce. When we summarise what the honourable member said, we find that he made no concrete proposals on behalf of the Opposition for solving the problems of the steel industry. He looked at the Government's decision and described it as a giant bungle. Of course, this is an interesting comment to come from the honourable member for Adelaide.
I assert to this House that the policies of the Government are clear and indeed consistent. This is in marked contrast to those currently put forward by the Opposition. Its recent statements on the steel industry once again patently demonstrate its lack of knowledge of this huge and important industry. Over recent days we have seen a most extraordinary lack of planning and consistency on the part of the honourable member for Adelaide, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). The honourable member for Adelaide is reported to have said that a future--
Mr Hurford-Misreported.
Mr FIFE-Wait a moment. The honourable member for Adelaide is reported to have said-I have not seen any report to correct this-that a future Labor government would be prepared to buy up to 50 per cent of the steel operations of the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd as part of its commitment to revitalise the Australian industry. This same spokesman said that he could not remember whether he had discussed this proposal with his leader, but he is reported as having said that he agreed that he discussed it with other

1448 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Australian Steel Industry

Labor front benchers. The very next day the Leader of the Opposition had to pull the honourable member for Adelaide into line, declaring that to talk of public participation in BHP was a very long way down a very long road. It has been widely acknowledged in the Press that the Leader of the Opposition in fact carpeted the honourable member for Adelaide over his rash statements. The honourable member for Wills is reported as going further than the honourable member for Adelaide. The honourable member for Wills is reported as saying that the Australian Labor Party did not want to get involved in a lame duck of a steel industry.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I put it to you and to the House that these antics demonstrate only too clearly the confusion present within the front benches of the Opposition on this important industry matter. I state categorically that this Government wishes to have a strong and viable steel industry. BHP is a major employer. We have a great concern for those people who are employed in the industry. We have a great concern for the industry itself. There are significant regional implications in anything that occurs and adversely affects the viability of BHP operations. It is important for other industries and it is important for the defence of the country. The Government does not accept any suggestion that its decision on the granting of temporary assistance to BHP was a significant factor in yesterday's announcement by the company. BHP has been in the process of restructuring its steel division for some time. Such restructuring is taking place world wide. Industries in many developed countries are contracting while those in some developing countries are expanding. Patterns of trade are changing and new technology is being introduced.
Superimposed on these long term trends is the current seriously depressed global demand for steel. World steel production in 1982 is likely to utilise only about 60 per cent of available capacity. These conditions have had a serious impact on both the exports and the domestic sales of the Australian industry. Because prices overseas have fallen heavily to reflect depressed trading, exports have become largely unremunerative. Moreover, the European Economic Community has limited the entry of foreign steel into its market. Depressed market conditions have caused overseas producers to seek markets wherever they can obtain them and thus important pressures in the Australian domestic market have increased markedly. I believe that this is understood by the unions. I hope that it is also understood by members of the Opposition. However the Temporary Assistance Authority considered that there

was little doubt that the principal underlying cause of the difficulties being experienced by local producers was related to economic conditions in both domestic and international markets rather than to increased import levels. Imports were only one element of the industry's difficulties. However, notwithstanding the comments and recommendations of the Temporary Assistance Authority, the Government decided that action to assist the industry was necessary. So the Government took action. It gave BHP more protection than that recommended by the Temporary Assistance Authority. In fact, the management of BHP has assured me that yesterday's announcement is not the result of the Government's temporary assistance decision. The company has told me that the products subject to temporary assistance were not produced at its steel works in Newcastle which, of course, is one of the plants that have been seriously affected by the decision. The fact is that the decisions announced by the company are based on its own commercial judgments of the restructuring necessary for an efficient industry. In view of the TAA's advice to the Governmentthat with the exception of certain small pipes and tubes there was insufficient evidence to suggest existing import levels were causing significant injury, action to reduce import levels could not be justified. However, imports in 1981-82 were at a high level and the industry, protected by relatively low tariffs, would be vulnerable to further growth in import volumes if no constraint were placed on such growth. Rather than leaving the industry exposed to a potentially disruptive volume of imports, the Government decided that imports should be restrained to around 1981-82 levels.
In determining the nature and extent of the Government's decision, the need for effective assistance to steel producers had to be balanced against the impact on a wide range of downstream user industries. I was pleased to hear the honourable member for Adelaide make mention of the problems that could face downstream users if there were a significant increase in the price of steel. He ought to know because he has a significant white goods indsutry in his electorate. If the price of steel were allowed to get out of control in this country, constituents of his who are employed in the white goods industry would, of course, suffer. Such a fundamental commodity as steel has an impact on all Australians. In particular, any major increase in protection for steel would have a significant effect on the competitiveness of downstream industries and the consequential loss of jobs in those industries. The Government does

Australian Steel Industry

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1449

not accept that its decision on steel will have significant employment consequences in an aggregated sense. It is not, however, indifferent to the possible effects on particular regions of the restructuring of this industry. Obviously the areas most likely to be affected are Newcastle, Wollongong-Port Kembla, Westernport and Whyalla.
Because the Government is very concerned that the combination of the cyclical downturn and longer term restructuring occurring in the industry would present adjustment difficulties for workers leaving the industry, it has invited the companies and unions to bring forward, jointly, proposals for a program of adjustment measures which might more effectively utilise existing government manpower programs in the areas or retraining, relocation and employment. For this reason, while permitting imports at 1981-82 levels to continue at existing rates of duty, a severe additional duty of 150 per cent is to be applied to imports above those levels to restrain further growth. This is a much greater level of protection than recommended by the Temporary Assistance Authority. At the same time it should have little adverse impact on user industries. I repeat that that is an important element in our decision.
The purpose of this course of action is to provide the industry with a predictable breathing space, pending receipt and consideration of the Industries Assistance Commission's report on long term assistance to the industry. I am advised that this report is due by May of next year. Let me emphasise that what we are dealing with at the moment is temporary assistance. It is a holding action until the appropriate long term structure of the industry, and the government measures necessary to assist achievement of that structure, are considered.
It must also be recognised that, as a result of other decisions of this Government, the industry now has available to it generous taxation concessions. Accelerated depreciation OVer either three or five years was introduced for the basic steel industry in the 1981-82 Budget-a year ahead of the introduction of similar provisions for industry generally. In this year's Budget, measures were announced which permit corporate groups such as the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd to offset losses in one area of their operations against ptofits from others. Restructuring of the industry is of course a continuous process, whether in the form of new technology, changes in capacity, quality or productivity improvements. I put on record that in 1981-82 the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd spent almost $360m on new investment in the steel division.

Whilst determination by the industry of its final size and shape may have to await the outcome of next year's Industries Assistance Commission inquiry, I understand it is a firm objective that substantial restructuring should take place. This is inevitable if the industry is to reduce the gap between its labour productivity and that of its overseas competitors. The measures already announced by BHP are steps in the restructuring process.
The Government is firm in its resolve that Australia should have a strong, viable steel industry, even if this means the industry will be of a different structure and size from the present industry. In this respect it cannot be too frequently emphasised that the responsibility for restoring the strength of the Australian industry does not rest only with BHP and the Government. The trade unions also have a responsibility in this matter. Claims for higher wages and shorter working hours made on BHP in the last 12 months, resulting in labour costs increasing much more rapidly than productivity, I submit have been a significant factor in its loss of competitiveness. Employees cannot have it both ways. If they want an industry with a prosperous long term future, it is incumbent on them to moderate their demands on wages and conditions to more realistic levels consistent with the industry's circumstances.
I repeat that this Government has a real concern for the people who work in this industry and the future viability of this industry. For the reasons I have given-employment, domestic activity, defence-or whatever reason one cares to mention, it is imperative not only that we retain the Australian steel industry but also that we retain it in a viable way.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-The honourable member for Adelaide seeks the indulgence of the Chair to make a personal explanation as he claims to have been misrepresented. He may proceed.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) - The Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce, (Mr Fife) misrepresented me in two ways during his speech. Firstly, he suggested that it was Australian Labor Party policy to invest in the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd and that I said so. It is not Labor Party policy and I did not say so. I have before me Australian Broadcasting Commission reports of the Press conference to which he referred. They make the position quite clear. I am reported as saying;
Any talk of equity in BHP depends on many factors and is a long way down the track.

1450 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Australian Steel Industry

Those were the very words I used. An accurate report in the Sydney Morning Herald states:
Mr Hurford emphasised that the ALP was not committing itself to invest in the steel industry.
But it was, he said, making a commitment to ensure a steel industry continued to exist in Australia and would, on winning office, establish a Steel Industry Advisory Council made up of management, unions and the Government.
If it then looked as if BHP was making insufficient investment of its own, an ALP Government might invest in a steel division detached from the rest of the company.
'The more BHP could be prodded into investing its own money the happier we would be' . . .
Finally, the report states:
He said it was clear an ALP Government would have plenty of other things it would want to spend money on. 'The ALP leadership would prefer to be taking some share in a buoyant successful sector rather than a lame duck' . . .
They are the very words used. Secondly, the Minister said that I had not corrected my statement. Mr Deputy Speaker, you might remember that I was in your electorate for the day or two following this misrepresentation of my views. As soon as I got to Brisbane a Press conference was held. I draw attention now to the second misrepresentation. The Australian carried the headline 'Hurford clears the air over Labor and BHP'. I draw this article and the clearing up of this matter to the attention of the Minister. I am very grateful to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), who were not at the time in the provinces or in the nice areas of this country such as your electorate, Mr Deputy Speaker, but in the capital cities, where they were able to clear up the matter for me.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (3.24)-1 strongly support the matter of public importance that has been raised by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford), namely:
The Fraser Government's culpable negligence in its failure to reverse the decline in Australian steel industry employment.
This Government can do nothing to rationalise its responsibility in connection with this question. There is one fundamental reason for the situation in which the Australian steel industry finds itself at the moment. That is that economic policies pursued by this Government have ground Australia to a halt. The Government, on its own reckoning, estimates that in the current financial year economic growth in Australia in the nonfarm factor will be nil and that domestic dwelling constructions and other forms of private fixed investment will fall seriously. These matters are

fundamental to the crisis being faced by the steel industry in Australia. The state of the steel industry has become a symbol of the disastrous policies being pursued by this Government. There is no explanation for the problems of the steel industry which lies outside the context of this Government's policies. It is not good enough for the Acting Minister forIndustry and Commerce (Mr Fife), in defending the Government's position, to say that the Government is concerned about those steel industry employees who have been thrown on to the employment scrap-heap. I want to see some evidence of what this Government is doing about the 1,500 people in the Newcastle area who, since March of last year, have been thrown on to the scrap-heap from the steel industry. I want more than words. I want to see evidence from this Government about what it is going to do for the 1,735 men who are presently employed in the steel industry but who will not be employed in the steel industry by the end of this year. That is the Christmas present from the Government to those employees. I am not satisfied with what has been said to the present. The Government i,s not concerned at all. The matter of public importance needs to be supported a little more than we have seen it supported to the present. The Government's obsessive and exclusive pursuit of monetarist nonsense lies at the basis of these problems. There are others, of course, and I will come to them, but that is fundamental. We are concerned not about the export of steel but about the domestic demand for steel in those areas that are grinding to a halt.
The level of domestic orders for steel in Australia dropped 30 per cent in the six months to June of this year. I have the figures for the last 12 months. In September 1981 there were outstanding orders for 459,000 tonnes. In December 1981, that is in the next quarter, the figure dropped to 454,000 tonnes, and in June of this year it dropped to 317,000 tonnes. In September of this year-this is the most recent figure-the figure dropped to 282,000 tonnes. Of course, the major area of decline has been in the construction industry. Overseas forces cannot be blamed for that. We are talking about domestic demand for domestically produced steel. There are other causes. At present significant dumping of steel from overseas steel producers is taking place on the Australian market. Australian steel producers and workers have a right to be protected against that practice.
It is not correct for people to assert, as they sometimes do, that it is a simple matter to compare costs between, for example, countries such as Korea and Australia in terms of steel production costs and imports into Australia of Korean steel.

Australian Steel Industry

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1451

Whilst Korea's level of tariff protection for steel is less than in Australia, other forms of non-tariff protection are provided. When people suggest that we should reduce our tariff protection in Australia for our steel industry, they should look not only at levels of tariff in other countries but also at some other non-tariff forms of protection. Here are some assisting the steel industry in Korea: First, the Korean Government is a major equity participant in the steel industry; the steel industry in Korea has access to interest free loans; there are tax free holidays for the steel industry and other industries; there is no charge of depreciation against current costs; and there are various export incentives as well. Let us not hear this nonsense that steel can come into Australia from Korea because its costs are so significantly lower than ours. Of course its costs are lower, but that is not the sole explanation; there are other explanations which are just as significant.
I said that the steel industry in Australia has become a symbol of the disastrous policies pursued by the Government. The Government's response to the recommendations of the Temporary Assistance Authority in relation to the request by the steel industry for protection on a temporary basis against some of the flat steels coming into Australia at present is symbolic of this Government's attitude towards the problems of the steel industry and in large part lies at the basis of those problems. The Minister said that the problems, and the announcements made yesterday, were not caused by this matter considered by the Temporary Assistance Authority. We have never suggested that they are. But yesterday's announcements were symptomatic of all the problems facing the steel industry.
Let us look at the way in which these brilliant people in the Government have responded to these problems. They decided, in connection with that recommendation which came from the Temporary Assistance Authority, that they were prepared to guarantee overseas producers of steel that they could sell in Australia an amount of steel equal to the volume they sold to Australia in 1981-82.
Mr West-A record year.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-It was a record year of imports as well. In effect, the Government has guaranteed overseas steel producers a ready made market in Australia for that guaranteed amount of steel. In the process, it has guaranteed jobs for overseas steel workers. What has it left the Australian steel industry? It has left the Australian steel industry to pick up the rest of the domestic market. There is no guarantee to the Australian

steel industry. The Government provided a guarantee for the steel mills in Korea but not for Australian steel workers and their future employment. It has provided a future guarantee for steel workers in Korea. Where the hell are we going? People in my electorate will now be displaced because of the Government's idiocy. I want to hear an explanation. I want the next speaker from the Government's side to try to defend that position, and then come to my electorate as well and try to defend it there.
There is a remarkable contrast in attitude. I am not criticising the open-ended arrangement that has been made to guarantee fodder subsidies for the rural sector-it is in a very serious situation and deserves support-but let us contrast the attitude of the Government to the steel workers and the steel industry and to the rural sector. First, it is estimated that that guarantee to the rural sector will probably cost $70m a month for every month it operates. The Government has refused to give an estimate, yet it has indicated the degree of concern that it is prepared to show the steel industry and its employees. We have suggested that there is good cause for looking at the possibility of limiting the import of steel from competing overseas steel producers so that the proportional contribution to the total Australian domestic market from our domestic producers and from imports would retain the same balance it had, say, over about the last three years. That matter needs to be looked at.
Because that exercise would concern the firms using steel further downstream by a possible addition to their costs, we also need to look at the possibility of providing some sort of subsidy to those downstream producers. They should not be burdened with additional costs for steel. If the Government is prepared to look at that matter, I guarantee that the annual cost of a reasonable scheme on that basis would not exceed $50m. If the Government is prepared to commit $70m a month to the rural sector-I am not arguing against it-it should consider committing $50m a year to the steel industry, the downstream producers and the users of steel. They are essentially two things that I think should be given consideration. The Government, if it persists with this sort of approach it has made to the steel industry and to other industries-in fact, to the national economy as a whole of which the state of the steel industry is a symbol-we will not be talking about the big Australian; we will be talking about the crippled Australian, and this Government will have to accept the responsibility for it.

1452 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Australian Steel Industry

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MOORE (Ryan) (3.33)-1 speak in this debate purely because of an interest in the iron and steel industry in Australia and because of the good fortune I had last year to visit most of the operations of Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd around the nation. It was quite a lengthy visit because of the enormous ramifications of the company's operations around the nation. There is no doubt right from the outset about the impression one gets of the enormous contribution which BHP makes to the nation as a whole, not just within the parameters of steel but by its total operations.
Today's debate on the steel industry has not produced much from the Opposition in terms of what might be done, except a tirade about monetarism. I can only remind those who present that tirade that it comes about only through lack of fiscal responsibility. If fiscal responsibility had been addressed by politicians in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s it would not be necessary to pursue some monetarist policies in the 1980s. Nevertheless, unless that is addressed the prospects of containing inflation and costs within the cost structure as a whole will make a nation such as Australia totally non-competitive. Then we shall see where we are with industries such as the iron and steel industries.
I got the impression when I went to the various plants-I went to the electorate of the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) and saw all the Newcastle plants-that BHP has not put the money into that area which it should have. As a result, it is really reaping the rewards of that lack of policy foresight. To relocate the works at Newcastle across the river and on to the industrial island on the other side, as was proposed when I was there, would certainly be a $1,500m-plus project at least. If one looks around that plant one can see that there is no way in which it can be improved on a patchwork quilt basis. There are too many heats and cools and reheats and recools-movements around the plant. Basically, that plant has to be relocated and started from scratch if it is to be effective and meet the competition from around the world.
If one looks at the accounts of BHP one notices that the company's source and application of funds statement does not readily show where that sort of money would come from. My rough estimate is that between $400m and $450m a year would be available for investment. BHP operates on an international scale and its requirements are

enormous. In New Guinea alone BHP is proposing to spend in excess of $200m on a copper mine. Absolutely hundreds of millions of dollars have gone into the North West Shelf project, which is still marginal at this point. To turn around and commit the sorts of funds that are necessary in Newcastle alone was, in my view, beyond the
commercial expectations of that company. As a consequence, the investment was not made.
I move on to Port Kembla, Whyalla, and the closed operation in Western Australia, Kwinana. All of those operations were probably by-products of State politics as much as anything else. There is not much doubt that the operation at Port Kembla could be turned into a very profitable and successful business. In my mind it offers the best opportunity for making profitable steel in Australia. In my view, the company attempts to operate on too wide a scale in steel rather than specialising in particular areas. It operates only to orders, it does not run stock positions. As a consequence of that, many of the users of Australian steel have complained to me of inconsistency in the quality of the steel they get. The runs are not long enough, therefore, to get the consistent quality steel that the users require. I refer in this area to the study into the motor car industry, which in itself has a great fascination. Two of the major manufacturers in the nation-one is Ford-base at least 50 per cent of their steel ex-Australia. In other words, they import it. As I did not know exactly how to judge the quality of steel, they contrasted for me the quality of the imported steel and its consistency against the quality of the local product. I did not find the same complaint from some of the other manufacturers in Australia but I had a sneaking feeling that they were probably saying that without mentioning it publicly.
I turn to the prospects, in my view, of a significant investment in the Port Kembla works and the possibilities that exist there because of the layout and the type of investment. Prospects in that area can be taken up to make those works a competitive operation. I am bound to say that Whyalla harbours more under the illustrious title of States rights than it does under economic realities, and I am sure the same applied to the Western Australian plant. The steel operations in this nation must be moulded into a national concept. In the 1981 Budget the Government provided a special depreciation allowance for the steel industry. In retrospect, I presume that was not enough to encourage investment, certainly not against the cost in Newcastle alone. We need a concept of going out and seeking a policy, finding the areas in which we can maximise our special resources and techniques to get a viable and profitable industry

Australian Steel Industry

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1453

going. There is no point in subsidising downstream. That is only postponing the agony. We must face up to the consequences today. In this nation, where we have so much in terms of coal and iron ore resources, we have a natural advantage over the rest of the world. Something like four-fifths of the bulk that is moved from iron ore and coal mines is pure bulk that disintegrates in the first process. That must be an enormous advantage to this nation if we can only come to grips with it.
Before concluding I want to add a few words on the role of imports. There is no doubt that imports suit certain manufacturers. They meet the balances between supply and demand. There is also no doubt that dumping is taking place on the Australian market. The use of developing country preferences in itself has helped access. To overcome this problem the Government in 1981 set up a special dumping committee, which was a fast track approach to dumping and I am sure was a benefit to the company. If one looks at BHP's annual report for 1981 one sees that a special reference is made to dumping. In my view, this is still not enough to come to grips with the matter because proving dumping is an extraordinarily difficult task. Even in negotiations with certain Japanese and Korean manufacturers, it is almost impossible to prove dumping.
I can say only that the role of dumping is critical at the moment to the prospects of BHP steel, to its developments and to its intention in the future to invest the sorts of sums of money that are required to make a steel industry viable. I think that is in the national interest, and I am sure it is the right thing for this nation to do. Subsidies and the use of national superannuation funds, as I read in the Australian Labor Party's platform policy, in these areas is not the answer unless the industry is profitable. Why should national superannuation funds be used in non-profitable investments? Every pressure should be put on the company to come up with proposals for the future of its steel investment. It might well be that other domestic competitors are necessary. It might well be that we should specialise in certain steels which are common to Australia. It might be that we ought to think big and go into something substantial in the iron ore areas of Australia in order to take up this great advantage we have in the areas of transport and raw materials. Most of all, I am sure the answer to the problem lies in getting a coordinated policy with the company out into the open and ensuring that we get trade union co-operation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-The discussion is concluded.

PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South West Tasmania. Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians, for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate, and your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier and Mrs Kelly.
Petitions received.
Proposed Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) bipartisan concern exists in the Australian community ove.r involvement of Australian military forces in the Middle East where those forces are not under United Nations auspices;
(2) concern is also evident about Australia's military capacity to provide those forces without weakening Australia's defence;
(3) Sinai is not an area within Australia's sphere of influence; and,
(4) Australian agricultural export markets may be adversely affected by Australian military participation in Sinai.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament does not ratify Australian military participation in the proposed Sinai peacekeeping force, unless that force is fully controlled by the United Nations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth: That we protest at breakdowns in our Restrictive Immigration policy which, many senior members of our parliament had vigorously supported in their past promises to the Australian people.
We urge the Government to accede, not only to the wishes of the majority, as expressed in all public opinion polls, but also to act in accordance with their own statements. For e.g.:
(I) 'We want one Australian people, one Australian Nation.'-Mr McMahon.

1454 REPRESENTATIVES IS September 1982

Petitions

(2) The avoidance of difficult social problems following an influx of people having different standards of living.'-ALP policy 72.
(3) 'I believe we should do all in our power to prevent the build-up of ethnic groups within Australia.'-Mr MacKellar.
(4) 'Our policies reflect the firm and unshakeable determination of the Government to maintain a homogeneous society, a society that is essentially undivided and free of avoidable tensions.'- Dr Forbes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that whereas the current rates of personal income tax are onerous and destructive of personal incentive, particularly since the cessation of income tax indexation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formerly call upon the Parliament assembled to legislate such changes to the current taxation law as will-
raise the minimum level at which income tax is first payable to at least $4,500.00,
proportionately increase the figures at which the higher rates of tax attract,
allow taxpayers to claim the full amount for each item within the Concessional Expenditure Rebate, and
adjust the rates of tax payable so that no higher rate of tax is payable than fifty percent of income earned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDean.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament asembled. The humble petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Newcastle respectfully showeth: The old age pension is granted, according to the Constitution of the Land, Federal Parliament, and the people, conditionally to all citizens, who were non-serving persons in the Forces, on reaching 65 years of age.
We of the Defence Forces, past and present, are entitled to the above mentioned pension five years earlier, i.e., at 60 years of age.
An unconditional pension is granted to people who did not risk their life and limbs at any war.
We wish to ask the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, why, we ex-Defence Forces are not entitled to a no means test at 65 years of age?
This means that a non-serving citizen, on retirement at 65 years of age, only has to wait five years to be free of the means test, as against the veterans waiting 10 years for the same privilege.
Those people who are interested, regarding this matter, and wish to draw this subject to our present Federal Government's attention, please sign below.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you, our Honourable Member will bring this matter to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs attention and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

by Mr Charles Jones.
Petition received.
Funding for Independent Schools in the Australian Capital Territory
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned on behalf of concerned citizens respectfully showeth: That it is important that there be freedom of choice in education in the Australian Capital Territory'.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Federal Government provides adequate funding for independent schools in the Australian Capital Territory and more particularly for the establishment of a third Grammar School in Canberra.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Vietnam Veterans
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) that US, Australian and allied forces used huge amounts of toxic chemicals for military purposes, such as Agents Orange, Blue and White, in Vietnam during the war there;
(2) many of these chemicals were, and are, known to be highly dangerous to human health;
(3) Australia's Vietnam veterans and their families are suffering many severe problems which may be due to their exposure to these chemicals; and
(4) the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia has been seeking a Royal Commission for well over two years to ensure an independent investigation of these matters.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) express its support for the Royal Commission; and
(b) urge the Federal Government to establish the Royal Commission immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Post Office, East Cannington
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-We who are shortly to be deprived of our local Post Office at East Cannington request most urgently that both the Federal Minister for Telecommunications Hon. Mr Brown, M.P. and Mr Peter Shack, Member for Tangney take immediate action against the closure of an efficient, profitable and much needed facility.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrShack.
Petition received.

Air Navigation Legislation Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1455

AIR NAVIGATION LEGISLATION (VALIDATION AND INTERPRETATION)
BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 9 September, on motion by Mr Fife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (3.44)-The Opposition does not oppose the Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Bill. It is purely a machinery measure to correct an error that occurred when the ministry of Transport was needlessly split into the separate ministries of Transport and Construction and Aviation. Unfortunately, it has taken some 16 weeks for someone, somewhere-we are not told where or when-to discover that an oversight or an error had been made. One would have expected that the Government, having decided upon the retrograde step of splitting the Ministry of Transport into two separate ministries, would have been able to carry out even this simplest of procedures to facilitate the transfer of powers and delegation from the Secretary to the Department of Transport to the Secretary to the new Department of Aviation.
We are concerned with the necessity for this Bill and we deplore the circumstances that brought the Bill about. Once again this shows that the Fraser Government cannot be relied upon to carry out even the simplest of administrative practices. It again reflects the incompetence of the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) and of his Government and its total inability to manage even the simplest aviation matters. Within the Department of Aviation and within the Department of Transport and Construction there are highly skilled officers. There are officers of dedication and competence who give of their best in service to the people of this country. I have to express sympathy for those officers when they have to try to cope with the resources that are made available to them by this Government and when they have to try to cope with the quality ofleadership that is given to them. In my view they cannot be held to blame in this instance. If they could be, surely the Minister would have said so. So we have to look elsewhere for the responsibility.
Under a competent and responsible government a Bill of this nature would be of minor import. However, in current circumstances of raging ineptitude, incompetence and the greatest theft ever of public revenue through the non-collection of taxation this Bill is just, as I said, one more piece of evidence of the Government's inability to manage competently the affairs of this nation. Let me remind the House of the words of this Prime

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) a few years ago. He claimed:
We will provide a government of responsibility and integrity.
We will provide a government that will be worthy of the trust of the Australian people.
That statement was made to the Victorian State Council of the Liberal Party on 17 November 1975. I suggest that that promise, that undertaking, has not been fulfilled.
Let me for a few moments-I do not want to delay the House too long on a Bill of this naturereview the administration of aviation over recent times by this Government and try to discover how this error, as we are told it is, occurred. We had the Secretary to the Department of Aviation carrying out very important responsibilities and making very important decisions in his office under the Air Navigation Act without having the legal power to carry out those responsibilities. We witnessed early last year the infamous treatment that was handed out by the then Minister for Transport to the Holcroft Committee of Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares. We saw earlier the fiasco of the Walter fire engines that resulted in this Parliament being misled and in public funds being squandered. It was the subject of a Joint Committee of Public Accounts inquiry. We have seen air fares doubled and 14 consecutive increases. We have seen the diminution of the supervision of air safety standards in this country. These are some of the highlights of the performance of the previous Minister responsible for aviation matters.
Now we come to the present Minister for Aviation. He had some rather scathing remarks to make about the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) a few minutes ago in an earlier debate. But the new Minister for Aviation, we need to remind the public and the Parliament, i& the same Minister who presided over the Federal Narcotics Bureau whilst it was steadily being infiltrated by criminals and while people were being murdered. I suppose it is reasonable to expect in those circumstances that a new Secretary to the Department of Aviation would be appointed, but he has not been clothed with the powers necessary to carry out his tasks. It is not surprising. The Bureau's performance while it was being infiltrated by criminals was lauded by the Minister. He begged the Director for three days to withdraw his resignation. As I said, when the Williams Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs came in the Bureau was promptly abolished and the Governmentacted.
Let me review, very quickly, what is happening in the general administration of government that

1456 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Air Navigation Legislation Bill

has led to this incident. The Bureau of Customs is being investigated. Now we are told a new service is to be formed. The Department of Health is being investigated by the most powerful committee of the Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee, again over fraudulent handling of public moneys-the Medibank fraud. The Attorney-General's Department, the Crown Solicitor's Office and the Australian Taxation Office are the subject of inquiry and critical attention in the wake of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. The Department of Primary Industry is the subject of a royal commission in regard to its administration of meat export procedures. So in total, we have a government which has a wonderful incapacity to know what is going on in the respective departments and a wonderful array of Ministers who say: 'We are not responsible. We did not know'. They do not name who was responsible.
Let us run through the list, an unprecedented list in the history of the Federation. At no other stage in the history of this nation has there been such an array of Federal departments of administration under examination either by senior committees of the Parliament or senior officials appointed by government or by royal commissions. The Department of Primary Industry is being investigated by a royal commission in relation to the meat export procedures as are the Bureau of Customs, the Department of Health, the Attorney-General's Department, the Crown Solicitor's Office and the Australian Taxation Office. And here we have again the poor old Department of Transport which is now the Department of Aviation. I would have thought with all the experience of the Department of Transport and its dedicated officers that on a simple little task like this the Government would have been able to get its act right. But alas, even that it could not do. This Bill would not have been necessary if the Minister for Aviation and this Government had properly carried out the simplest of basic tasks, that is, the preparation of administrative arrangements to clothe the Secretary to the Department of Aviation with the power to carry out his responsibilities.
Who was responsible for the error? Who was responsible for this maladministration? Who is the guilty one who did not ensure that the adminitrative arrangements were completed? We are not told. The Parliament is not important enough to be told, according to the Government. Why did it take 16 weeks to discover this? Why was it not discovered immediately or on the first occasion

when the Secretary to the Department of Aviation had to exercise his powers under the Air Navigation Act? Are we to believe it was the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) again, or are we to believe it was the Minister? Are we going to blame again some anonymous public servant in the Department of Aviation? The Government would have done the Parliament a service if it had explained how it occurred, what kinds of decisions were involved, how it arose, and what remedial action was being taken.
I can only conclude, in the absence of any information of that nature, that the error was an error on the part of the Government, not of the officers concerned. The Minister for Aviation is a loyal Government Minister. He has shown that on many occasions. He showed it a while ago. In no way is he going to mar his Government's record of bungling and incompetence in the administration of aviation matters. The plea that has been mounted, unspoken, is the usual plea of the government of the day-it did not know, the Minister did not know and, therefore, it is not responsible. As I said, this is the latest piece of evidence in a growing mosaic of incompetence, ineptitude and maladministration under this Government. It is a government that is in its death throes. It is a government that has to go. In these circumstances, as I said before, the Opposition does not oppose the Bill.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted fOJ third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown) read a third time.
LIVE-STOCK SLAUGHTER LEVY AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Bill 1982 as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1457

covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (3.55)-The Australian Labor Party is not opposed to the Livestock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill 1982 and the Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Bill 1982 although it would like to raise several questions about them. The purpose of the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill is to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964 to increase the maximum rates of levy which may be prescribed to finance the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, meat and livestock research and cattle disease eradication. The two Acts to be amended today raise funds from the meat and livestock industry for the same purposes and are similar in structure and rates but one applies to livestock slaughtered and the other to stock exported live.
The proposed increases covered by the Bills were recommended by the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation after consultation with the industry groups. The Government has accepted that the Corporation will need an increase in levy income in order to avoid operating at a deficit or cutting back on its activities and service to the industry and that this will first necessitate an increase in the maximum rates currently provided in the legislation. The levy is imposed on slaughterings of cattle, calves, bobby calves, sheep, lambs, buffaloes and goats. It has separate components for the financing of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, meat and livestock research, meat processing research and cattle disease eradication. There are comparable rates for each component in respect of each class of livestock. The Act specifies the maximum rates only, with operating rates being prescribed by regulation. Separate maximum rates already exist in the legislation for the research and disease eradication components. The Bills propose to double the aggregate maximum rates which govern the size of the AMLC component. For example, for cattle and buffaloes the rate goes from $1.50 to $3 a head.
Finance for the brucellosis and tuberculosis eradication campaign has been falling behind costs. I will have more to say about that in a moment. Whilst the Government announced in the Budget that it will write off the outstanding industry debt of $23.5m, it is anxious to ensure that the continuing program does not result in the industry building up a further debt. The Bill, therefore, provides for an increase of two-thirds in the current maximum rates, from $3 to $5 for cattle and buffaloes, from $1 to $1.67 for calves and from 30c to 50c for bobby calves. In the immediate

period, for the main amount of the increase in levy-from $3 to $5-the cost will not go over $4 for some time.
The Opposition would like to make a few comments on this matter. The action was requested by the industry through the AMLC. Given the situation that the industry faces, I suppose that is the natural order of things, to some degree. The increase in slaughter levies on cattle for disease eradication has also been announced in the Budget. With regard to the raising of maximum levels, one can quite reasonably comment on the general issue of who determines whether producers and processors get value for money from the activities of the AMLC. The AMLC, as honourable members will realise is subject to a lot of debate amongst the cattle organisations in this country. For example, is it enough to assume that, because the levies are increased at the request of the industry through the AMLC, all producers consider their contributions and their money to be well spent?
At a time when farm costs are rising-they rose in real terms by about 10 per cent in 1982-83-when beef prices are falling-they fell by something like 40 per cent during 1981-with further falls likely during 1982-83, and the drought is placing added burdens on Australia's livestock producers, any request for additional levy should be regarded critically. I am not quite sure that this critical examination takes place at any level. The obvious AMLC response is that when times are hard even greater effort has to be placed on promotion and research. But the onus also should be on the AMLC to satisfy producers that any increase in the levy will result in a more than equivalent benefit. The rationale given by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) for the increased slaughter levy for disease eradication is that it is to ensure that the continuing program does not result in the industry building up a further debt. However, it was because the Commonwealth Government did not meet its funding commitment that the $23.5m debt referred to accumulated.
The Commonwealth's contribution was half the original agreed level. The imposition of the increase in the slaughter levy comes despite an earlier commitment by the Commonwealth to reduce the burden of the livestock slaughter levy if the profitability of the beef industry slumped. That occurred at the time of the stewardship of the former Minister for Primary Industry, the honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair). The slump has occurred, and in a big way, but the slaughter levy has been increased, not decreased. The Government should also be

1458 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

prepared to make a definite commitment to fund part of the brucellosis and TB eradication campaign. We could take as an example the 15 per cent contribution suggested by the Industries Assistance Commission and agreed to by the Commonwealth at the time. It should stick to the agreement.
After the Budget the Minister for Primary Industry said that the beef industry is the one that has been best looked after in terms of the Budget documents. He tried to take a lot of credit for the Government's decision to wipe out the $23.5m debt. The Cattle Council of Australia rightly said that that is all it has done. It is wiping off the debt. It has not done anything beyond meeting the agreement that it entered into at an earlier time. The Government says that it is increasing the levy because it does not want the industry debt to build up again. I re-emphasise that the debt has not built up since the levy has been $3 a head. The charge will go up to $5 eventually. The debt has accumulated since 1979 because the levy was only $1 a head at that time. It has grown since then because of the interest charges. The Government rejected all pleas for assistance on the interest charges or the debt itself until this Budget. It took at least 18 months of nagging by the Cattlemen's Union of Australia, the Cattle Council, and the National Farmers Federation to have the debt wiped out. It had to be wiped out only because the Government was not meeting its previous agreement. The Government has said that it will also now pay 75 per cent of the slaughter compensation for all brucellosis and TB reactors. That decision was partly announced on 6 April when it was noted by the industry that fewer cattle were being slaughtered because there were fewer reactors. So it is no great increase. The Budget also provides for $100,000 for a gamma irradiator to combat screw worm if it arrives. I am sure that it is needed but I would not like to suggest that this is a major Budget coup. A few other matters were mentioned but they are basically things that we have known about and they did not really require the Budget to tell us about them.
I think it is appropriate at this time to review the situation in the beef industry. I have already given some statistics on the increase in costs, the downturn in beef prices and the market situation being faced overseas. Only a slight improvement is expected in the economy of the United States of America. With regard to the Australian economy, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Primary Industry can truly be seen to be leading this country to disaster. One of the things that determines the future and the wealth of the beef cattle industry-if I can talk about

wealth for it any more-is the general economic conditions prevailing in Australia and particularly in our overseas markets. We can say that saleyard prices will not increase significantly before the end of 1982 at the earliest. An expected reduction in slaughterings, combined with a forecast slight improvement in the United States price, might cause saleyard prices to rise slowly from late in 1982.
Given the expectations of beef prices remaining at their relatively low levels, a further decline is expected in the Australian cattle herd during 1982. Concurrently an expected drop in slaughterings and a marginal decline in average slaughter rates should result in a decline in beef and veal production, particularly later in 1982. This is due to the fact that many cattle previously destined for slaughter in the spring months have already been slaughtered because of the drought in Queensland and most of New South Wales and stronger than expected demand for export type cattle. So we can say that the expected drop in production, a forecasted slight improvement in export demand and the weak or devastated Australian economy are expected to limit the level of domestic beef and veal consumption in 1982-83. Exports to the United States of America are forecast by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics to decline slightly as the recent high rate of shipments is expected to ease towards the end of this year. We see in the papers today that the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation is moving to limit the export amounts going to the United States to fall in line with the voluntary agreements which we have with that country and its so-called counter-cyclical policy.
The cattle industry is in a slump. This Government has not reacted to it. A lot of plans have been going on. There has been a lot of movement by the industry itself. I will get on to that subject later. Abattoirs have been shutting at a great rate for the last 15 to 18 months. The Government has done nothing about that besides saying something about referring the matters to the Industries Assistance Commission. I will get on to that in a moment. Some parts of Australia are going into a four year drought. I must say now that the Minister for Primary Industry is at the table that while he was very happy to say that there was no need for any more Commonwealth initiatives with respect to the drought the Prime Minister intervened and decided for him that there was a need for further Commonwealth initiatives. The Australian Labor Party certainly welcomes that. Our overseas markets are dicky, to say the least. On

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1459

top of that, of course, we have the meat substitution scandal. I understand that the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Meat Industry will report on 22 September or in the near future. The Minister for Primary Industry, in giving evidence to that inquiry, blamed the Department of Primary Industry for not informing him of some of the matters that were going on. The previous Minister for Primary Industry says, of course, that the Department was all right when he left it. I guess that one can take from that that the honourable member for New England blames the present incumbent in that office.
I do not know what to say in terms of making some of the more high-flown accusations about honesty in this place. I just point out that I have many doubts about some of the statements emanating from this Government on primary industry matters. It seems to me that scapegoats are constantly being found. The other day my colleague the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) pointed out some of the conflicts in statements by the Minister about the Omega siting.
Mr Nixon-Totally inaccurate, you might recall.
Mr KERIN-The Minister denies this. I would like him also to nail another conflict. A moment ago I referred to the decision by the Government eventually to respond to the pleas of the meat processing industry and set up an inquiry into it. The Minister's Press release of 21 July stated:
"The Government has decided that the Industries Assistance Commission be requested to undertake an urgent and broad-ranging study of the industry. It will have wide terms of reference and will be required to report within six months".
The inquiry looks as though it will be a very comprehensive inquiry indeed. It is not before time. In fact, it is well over time. That industry as has been in a lot of trouble for a long time. It is part of the overall livestock industry. The Minister may be able to clarify points for me. On 18 August 1982 Senator Button asked the following question on the situation in abattoirs:
What action has the Government taken to assist the meat processing industry meet its problems?
The answer supplied by the Minister for Primary Industry to the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) stated:
The Government has considered requests from the industry but decided not to offer assistance.
There is no reference in the rest of clause 5 of the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill to the Industries Assistance Commission. Seeing that that follows not quite a month after the earlier announcement by the Government that there was to be a meat processing inquiry, I hope that this does

not imply that the Minister has decided already that he will not take any notice of the results of that inquiry.
Mr Nixon-Don't talk nonsense.
Mr KERIN-It certainly looks as though he will not take any notice of it. He said that the Government has considered it and that there is no need to give any assistance. That is rather confusing. I would really like to work out what the Minister is on about. I think the Minister has an irresponsible attitude to the beef industry. We can take his statement in Mackay to the Cattlemen's Union of Australia the other day when he got heckled. He spelt out a few truths to the cattlemen there. I agreed with some of those things. He got heckled. He deserved to be heckled. He said at that meeting:
You're quite welcome to take the whole industry out of the Government's hands-I don't want it.
That indicates to me a rather irresponsible attitude to the great cattle industry. I do not know why he should say those things. There has been absolutely no lead from this Government on all the problems of the cattle industry. I concede the nature of the industry. I realise how hard it is. The cattlemen can give as good as they are given. The Minister has a great reputation for head kicking. He might get a bit back from some of those fellows in north Queensland. I do not know why he said that he did not want the industry under any terms at all. I think that is a rather irresponsible attitude to take.
The Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation was set up about five years ago at the request of the industry. It was set up, of course, to replace the Australian Meat Board. Poor old Colonel McArthur and that board got quite a hammering from the industry. It did not seem to think it was much good. Now we have the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation. Both sides of the House think it is rather destructive for people in the cattle industry to concentrate most of their attack on the Chairman of that organisation, Geoff Jones, as if they believe: If we get rid of Jonesy we will solve all of our problems. The AMLC, a meat board or whatever organisation is set up by an Act in this place or Acts in the other parliaments in this country is accountable to the Parliament. The industry needs to realise that. With all these plans being put forward it seems to me that many organisations do not quite understand that. On the one hand they say that they want the Government completely out of it; they want no involvement by the Government; they are philosophically opposed to government per se. On the other hand they say that they want a

1460 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

government to pass an Act of Parliament to create a statutory authority and to give them monopoly power over the live beasts at some stage or another. Again, that is not ever clearly specified.
If we look at some of these plans by the Cattle Council of Australia, if we look at the so-called Gunn plan and the Cattlemen's Union, which is part of the Cattle Council, we understand a lot of its frustration with this Government. The Government does not seem to be acting at all. The industry is scathing about this Government and this Minister. One only has to take the remarks of the Chairman of the Cattlemen's Union, Mr Park, at Mackay at the conference. There are some beautiful references to people being as lively as a dead goanna. I think that really sums up the attitude and the speed with which this Government acts on the cattle industry. Let me go through some ideas which are being put forward by the Cattle Council of Australia. There is an emerging consensus within the industry about what sort of structure it wants in the future. I think both sides of this House would readily concede that some of the inherent problems of the cattle industry will not be solved overnight. We are dealing with facts that we just cannot get away from no matter how much we think we can. It is quite clear that the marketing end of the industry and the way in which we handle exports and the domestic market certainly need a lot more attention. The Cattle Council's national marketing strategy for beefSir William Gunn's plan would agree with this-is summarised as follows:
A single national Authority, with responsibility for both export and domestic marketing issues;
The Authority to operate under a strong decentralised, State-based management system;
I think some people would fall out here-
The national office to consist of the Chairman, plus a small nucleus of staff, responsible for international trading negotiations, export market development and the overall coordination of State Divisions;
The Chairman and Board Members to be selected directly by producers;
The Authority to be funded by producers through a levy.
The Council sets out the administration that it would like to see under several headings. It would like a meat inspection administration. Surprise, surprise, it would like to see the creation of a single meat inspection service. The Minister has said already that we will have that by 1 January 1983. I might take a small bet with him on that. He has already said that there would be blood on the floor if we did not have one, I think, last year. The matter is difficult but I think the Government has to persist. It has to knock more heads together on this matter. In terms of the meat inspection

administration the Council has said also that it will introduce a fee for service. I think the Department has been putting forward some good ideas in that area.
Under the export market development heading the Council states that it wants to pay more attention to selling meat in the ASEAN region. The Cattle Council of Australia seeks a decision from government to reduce gradually excessive levels of protection to some manufacturing industries. I guess we can say quite clearly that that is opposed by the National Country Party. The Council also has a heading on quality control and product description. Another heading relates to sole trading. I think we can say this is well and truly in the pipeline. If it is not implemented, we might as well say that it is. It wants to continue live exports unhindered. The Council seems to think somehow that the AMLC is going to do something about the economic community in Japan and the United States of America. Certainly the Council is aware of those problems.
Other headings relate to domestic promotion, the branding of carcasses and electrical stimulation. I will not go into that as some of my colleagues might get a bit nervous. There is also a chapter on product description, standard carcass definition, electronic marketing, standard sale contracts, market information, slaughtering costs and industry rationalisation. I note that the Council will have some problems restructuring meat workers' awards. Also mentioned are market support mechanisms when the industry itself is in absolute chaos or at distressed levels. I think it can be said that the industry is at distressed levels right now. This is the reason Sir William Gunn came up with his plan. He is trying to do something about the industry.
The crisis has set the background for the more radical reform of the industry which has been proposed by Sir William Gunn. The AMLC has been criticised over a long period and its powers were amended last session to give it more scope for directing the industry. What the meat substitution scandal highlighted was not only the dilatoriness of the Minister but also the inadequate operations of the Department of Primary Industry and the Bureau of Animal Health. As I have said, producers are always scathing of the Government's inactivity. I do not think the industry, the Opposition and the people of this country can accept any longer the classic excuse of this Government that when the industry sorts itself out it will listen to a consensus opinion on what to do but that it will not do anything before then. That is not giving any lead at all. We all know how difficult it is to have a unanimous view or a

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1461

consensus in an industry as complex as the beef industry. I think if we are waiting for that at government levels, we will never do anything about the beef cattle industry.
With that sort of background, with the crisis and lack of Government action, it was relatively easy for Sir William Gunn to come up with a save the industry plan and to attract media coveragenot necessarily support, but still a lot of support in desperation from many producers. Sir William has a name in wool and meat circles through his position on the AMLC and the Australian Wool Corporation, of which he was Chairman. What the Gunn plan really boils down to is a free enterprise, producer funded marketed authority with monopoly selling powers and statutory backing to collect the funds. In many ways it is a model along the lines of the sugar industry and the CSR Ltd-Queensland Government relationship. What the plan wants is a free enterprise operation supported by Federal Government legislation. It wants a free enterprise operation not accountable to government or Parliament, nor subject to direction from politicians. It wants no Public Service Act restrictions on salary. There has been mention of $100,000 as being a reasonable salary for the person in charge. Sir William wants a replacement for the AMLC because he says its constitution is inadequate.
As I have already said, there are some conflicts relating to the Chairman of the AMLC. Sir William wants an amount of $IOOm from producers to fund the organisation. One estimate is that this would require a $14 a head contribution. The stud cattle industry would not contribute on that basis. It said that this was unacceptable. There is now a suggestion of a levy of $7 or $8 a head. I do not know where we are going to get $IOOm from the industry in its present state. The plan wants freedom from all Public Service regulations for the board. It wants a board of nine people with a maximum number of two producers. It would consist of a chief executive, a Government representative, two producers and another five people with marketing experience. It wants a single selling power to countries with single buying authorities. I have already said that that is well on the way. Finance would be raised through the Government but then the plan suggests that the users of the money not be accountable.
What Sir William plans is to interpose a statutory authority which complies with accountability requirements between the free enterprise marketing authority and the Government itself. I could say that maybe this will not work either, but it is a novel concept. Sir William eventually wants a

pooling system for meat sales to be distributed back to producers later. There have been mutterings and mumblings within the industry and some hope has been held by some people that eventually if we get a reformed structure, if we get some of the issues of carcass description and various methods such as computer selling and whatever all sorted out, we can get on to the New Zealand schemes of market intervention. Again I must say that I have profound doubts about that. The New Zealand beef industry does not closely resemble the Australian beef industry.
A while ago I said I was sure honourable members on both sides of the House were pretty well aware of some of the very basic facts which one cannot get away from in regard to the beef industry. Regardless of what sort of set up exists at the administrative level and no matter what technical breakthroughs we might have-whether we have a national meat inspection service or promotions and the right corporations all worked out-there are some things we cannot get past. Firstly we have international markets for our beef which, if not politically corrupt are certainly manipulated. They are not manipulated in terms of supply and demand but in terms of the vested interests in the countries themselves. Surely we understand that. The domestic market for beef can be substituted quite directly by lamb and mutton. There are also highly integrated pig, chicken and fishing industries. Those industries can provide competition in terms of substitution of meat supplies to the consumer.
Secondly, it is not possible to get more money out of the consumer than he or she is willing to pay. Even now I think we can say there are some aspects of the charges on the industry being passed on to the consumer that are resented. Earlier I said that economic conditions in Australia and the world generally will determine whether the market outlook for beef picks up markedly. The domestic market situation means that the first thing people will stop eating if they are put on the dole-the Government already has hundreds of thousands of people on the dole in this country-is beef. In terms of the world economy the situation will depend very much on whether the United States and Japanese economies pull out of the recession, on what the European Economic Community does and on the Third World markets the Community is taking from us. World economic conditions will also determine beef industry expectations.
Another big problem for the beef industry which has to be addressed is the fact that the supply response cannot be readily estimated. It is

1462 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

not possible to predict the number of cows because so many climatic conditions intervene. For example, people who have the choice of growing wheat or going into wool will make their own onfarm decisions. I have already said that in the present situation the national cattle herd is going down. By and large, this is a rational response to the demand for beef, to seasonal conditions and on the choice of alternative forms of production. The next point is that beef cannot be stored to a great extent. There is always a fair degree of beef stored at anyone time but it is not possible to store enough to have a buffer stock scheme similar to the one for wool or wheat. It is possible to have beef coming in one end and going out the other but eventually there will be quality problems. This is one of the biggest problems with a stabilisation scheme for beef. It is just not possible to store beef to the extent that it is possible to store other commodities. The problem, of course, will relate to any different structure that is set up. For example, how the beef producers themselves determine what will go on once they have lost equity in the beast itself is another problem that will have to be addressed in respect of some marketing schemes being put forward.
One of the big problems in Australia is the difference between northern beef and beef grown on the Southern Tablelands or the wheat-sheep zones. Production patterns are completely different and the style of beast is different. That is also a matter that has to be taken on board. As all producers have stressed over the years, one of the biggest problems is that the processing, wholesaling and retailing part of the overall industry does not ~lways act in the interest of the cattle producers. I think that the two parts of the industry have made too much of that because it is quite essential that they work together. I think it is a rather semantic abstraction to wonder whether we are talking about two industries, a livestock industry and a meat industry. What is absolutely certain is that neither can prosper unless the two of them work together. It is only now that the processing part of the industry is really saying that its long term future really depends on the economic viability of the production side of the whole system. Alternatively, the producers for too long have been saying: 'Those fellows on the processing side are part of all our troubles'. I think the truth lies somewhere in between, and there is a need for people to get together on these issues if we are to have any reform of the whole system. The Opposition supports the Bill. I hope that the Minister answers the question I have pointed to in the Senate record.

Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (4.26)~1 support the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill and the Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Bill. In doing so, I ask: What has the Australian Labor Party done for primary industry? Just tell me that. The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) lampoons the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), who is continually helping the industry. What did we see back in the days when the Labor Party was in government? Gough came to Dirrinbandi, of all places, and addressed the graziers there. He told them that he was not interested in them, could not care less about them; all he was interested in was the people living around Sydney and Melbourne. He said that at his peril because we kicked him out of office eventually. He said that we had never had it so good. Then he jumped in a jet, flew back here to Canberra, sat down with his friend Nugget, who drew up a hit list, and proceeded to annihilate the lot of us. He did that at his peril because we kicked him out of office. We kicked the Labor blokes out of office, and they will never get back into office, I can assure them, while they criticise the initiatives we are taking in the industry. I would like the honourable member for Werriwa to accept those comments in good faith. He said that there are fewer and fewer reactors left in the industry. That is what this Government initiative is all about. It is about having no reactors for tuberculosis and brucella. The beef industry does not want one single reactor in this country, because when we get to that stage this disease will be completely annihilated in Australia. That means that we will be able to continue to trade with countries throughout the world.
Mr Cunningham~Have a look at the Kimberleys.
Mr IAN CAMERON~We are working towards doing away with this disease throughout Australia, and that is the reason for this legislation. I point out that, as the honourable member for Werriwa said, the levy is being increased to $3. The maximum is $5. We are not going to the maximum; we are going only to $3 at this stage. However, I point out that as the program continues and as labour and handling costs increase we will need all those funds to complete the program. Also under the legislation the name of the Exporter and Abattoir Consultative Group is to be changed to the Live-stock Exporters Consultative Group. Of course, people throughout Australia representing the slaughter industry and the livestock export industry and people from Queensland, the Northern Territory and every other State are members of that group.

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1463

I will read the current figures for livestock to give the House some idea of what is happening. There is a downturn in the beef industry in particular. In 1980 there were 26,203,000 cattle and calves on farm; in 1981 there were 25,168,000. Sheep numbers are down. Slaughterings increased from 6,900,000 to 7,235,000. That gives an indication of the current dry throughout Australia. The industry is having difficulty selling off its produce and has conceded that it has to cut down on its breeders. We on this side of the House do not want to see the complete collapse of the industry because we believe that it is most important for the economy of Australia for us to have a good, strong and viable beef industry. Three parts of Australia is settled by beef producers, and our Government, particularly the National Party, looks after those producers. The Labor Party could not care less about them. Also, live cattle exports in 1980-81 were 62,000; in 1981-82 they were 60,000.
Opposition members interjecting--
Mr IAN CAMERON-They cannot even agree amongst themselves. They are arguing and carrying on over there. Typical Labor members; shocking! The exports of sheep and lambs number 5 million. That figure is also up. I ask permission of the House to table these figures, to incorporate those important figures. As the honourable member for Werriwa mentioned, the Government allocated $23.5m to the program for brucella eradication. That debt had built up over a number of years and the industry sought to have that debt written off. This Government responded very well, I think, to the request that that happen.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-I wonder whether the honourable member would let me interrupt him for a minute to ask him whether he meant to ask to seek leave to incorporate that document in Hansard.
Mr IAN CAMERON-Yes, I seek leave to incorporate it in Hansard.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is not what he said. Is leave granted?
Mr Kerin-Can he tell me the reference, Mr Deputy Speaker?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think the honourable member ought to remember that he ought to show anything he wants to incorporate in Hansard to the Opposition spokesman. Is the honourable member prepared to go on with his speech while the Leader of the House looks after the matter?

Mr IAN CAMERON-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker. This Government has seen fit to allocate these funds to the industry, and we are all very grateful for it. The brucella and TB eradication program has been going on since 1970. Altogether, government and industry have spent over $400m. For those honourable members opposite who do not know how the program operates, a beast is bled and a test is taken; and that beast is continually bled until she gets a clean test. The test is done only on females. It is very awkward in the wide open spaces of Maranoa beyond the Cooper, where there are big cattle stations, to get clean musters, so in those parts what is termed a destocking program is taking place. Fortunately for them, many of those people have sold off vast numbers of those breeders that are not regarded as being clean cattle. They then buy clean ones. As the drought has set in throughout that part of Australia, most of those properties in the northern part of South Australia and the bottom parts of the Northern Territory and Western Queensland are not carrying very large numbers of breeders. I think that is very fortunate, otherwise we would see a calamity, particularly in the northern part of South Australia, where I have recently been. around Lyndhurst and limamincka where it is very dry indeed. I think we are fortunate in one sense that these people have been forced to destock.
The Government has been very good in the aid that it has given. There have been tax incentives for these people to establish holding yards et cetera to help with this program. That is what we are all about-keeping our people in primary industry viable. In 1975 an Industries Assistance Commission report suggested that this program last for only eight years; and it is intended that it come to a close in 1984. The Government has stated through the Australian Agricultural Council that it intends to boost this program with funds; and that is what the legislation is about. The Government is endeavouring to have Australia declared free of this disease by that time. I do not believe it will happen by 1984. It will probably take a couple more years. At least we have set ourselves a goal, -and that will be accomplished. As most honourable members know-at least those who live beyond the bitumen streets-there is a drought raging throughout Australia.
Mr O'Keefe-The worst for 40 years.
Mr IAN CAMERON-It is the worst for 40 years. I thank the national Press for the publicity it has given to the drought. All of a sudden 'drought' has become an in word. All sorts of stories are being written about it. In particular,

1464 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

one appeared this week in the prestigious Time magazine. Fortunately for me it gives the town of Dalby in my electorate a bit of a plug. The people there have not been very fortunate because Napier Grasslands has had to layoff a considerable number of its work force due to the drought. Unfortunately for us, I think that we will be in serious trouble until it rains. The Government has initiated a number of new programs which have been announced over the last couple of weeks. The Opposition says: 'Oh, the Minister just woke up one day and suggested that we need some aid'. That is not true.
Mr Robert Brown-I don't think he woke up at anytime.
Mr IAN CAMERON-That is not true. The Minister is very much awake, alive and on his feet; we can be sure of that. The drought measures program between the Commonwealth and the States has been in operation for a continuing time. As soon as the States spend their contribution-in the case of Queensland it is $3m-the Commonwealth automatically funds a range of programs.
Mr O'Keefe-Very generous assistance.
Mr IAN CAMERON-It is very generous assistance. There is the 75 per cent aid for the cartage of stock and $40,000 carryon loans are provided to help those who have to continue to live--
Mr Nixon-It is not much use in New South Wales.
Mr IAN CAMERON-There is nothing in New South Wales. The New South Wales Government has offered the primary producers of that State nothing. We can be dead sure that they will kick that Government out of office the next time they go to the polls. Wran will not survive; he is a dead duck.
Mr Campbell-He will not rely on your vote.
Mr IAN CAMERON-No. Thank God I do not live in New South Wales. Queensland is the land of plenty and honey. Honourable members opposite are quite welcome to come to Queensland and live under the Bje1ke-Petersen National Party Government. We have the highest standard of living in Australia and it is getting higher. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) recently announced a new series of programs to be funded directly by the Federal Government. There is to be a 50 per cent subsidy for drought feeding and a subsidy is also to apply to people who have to pay interest rates over 12 per cent. I personally believe that they are very good measures and that they will help to keep primary

industry in place in this country while the drought continues.
Mr Adermann-All Commonwealth funded.
Mr IAN CAMERON-They are 100 per cent Commonwealth funded. The Federal Minister will administer the interest subsidy scheme and the States will be looking after the drought feed scheme. The Prime Minister has also announced an inquiry into the processing industry. I would not say that that is overdue, but I guess that it is time we had one. Unfortunately we are seeing a fall off in capacity for abattoirs. We saw an enormous increase in abattoir construction in the boom 1970s when every local authority in Australia hopped in and reckoned that it had to have an abattoir in its backyard. It was as bad as all the saleyards we build throughout the country. The industry has been overserviced, but now that it has contracted, obviously it is in trouble. Of course, we have this fool system of tallies in abattoirs whereby an abattoir worker works only about four hours a day. Once he hits his tally in a day he gets double or triple time. The labour content of abattoirs is very expensive. I must say that the industry is finding it very difficult to pay all these ever increasing labour costs.
Mr Robert BrownYou exaggerate.
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am not exaggerating. No doubt after this inquiry we will be in a better position to understand just what is happening in the industry. As mentioned by the honourable member for Werriwa we have a number of plans. As usual when an industry gets into trouble we all start to look for means and ways of getting out of it. Bill Gunn has his plan, the Cattle Council of Australia has its, no doubt the Cattlemen's Union of Australia has one up its sleeve, and so they go. But at least the Minister has been prepared to call all the industry representatives together to see if he cannot get some sense out of the lot of them. I think that that is a very good initiative.
Mr Lloyd-Has he succeeded yet?
Mr IAN CAMERON-No, but he will. It is a very good initiative on behalf of this Government. I believe that in time we will have a much better system of marketing beef in this country. We also intend to introduce a national carcass classification scheme. I hope that the enabling legislation will come to the House if not this year, certainly early next year. The other thing I wish to mention--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Before you reach that point, this might be a convenient spot for me to stop you, if I may. A little while ago you sought leave of the House to incorporate a

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1465

matter in Hansard. Quite logically, I think, as you had not showed it to the Opposition spokesman prior to that time, he has asked what the source of your handwritten figures is. Would you care to provide that information?
Mr IAN CAMERON-It was the Parliamentary Library.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

ALL CATTLE AND CALVES-ON FARM

1980 1981

.......... ..........

26,203 25,168

ALL SHEEP-ON FARM
1980 1981

135,985 134,407

CATTLE
SHEEP
CALVES (In addition) LAMBS (In addition)

SLAUGHTERINGS
(To nearest thousand)
1980-81 1981-82 1980-81 1981-82 1980-81 1981-82 1980-81 1981-82

6,973 7,235 15,250 11,894 1,463 1,468 16,722
16,273

EXPORTS-FOOD SOURCE
(State of origin)
CATTLE
1980-81
New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

2,659 158
31,489 2,194 5,555 nil
20,788

Australian total

62,843

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

1981-82

Australian total Plus Re-exports

5,323 4,768 13,667 6,287 7,679 2,160 19,830
59,714 1,200
60,914

EXPORTS
SHEEP AND LAMBS
1980-81
New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia

33,393 566,705
33,400 1,586,480

Western Australia Northern Territory Tasmania
Australian total

3,337,916 nil
118,175
5,676,067

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Northern Territory Tasmania

1981-82

Australian total

74,928 552,594
nil 2,156,778 2,995,658
30,000 150,592
5,960,550

Mr IAN CAMERON-I thank the House. In closing I just say that there is much controversy at present about the introduction of foot and mouth disease to Australia.
Mr Campbell-Foot in mouth disease?
Mr IAN CAMERON-Foot and mouth disease. Foot in mouth disease is something that all the blokes on the Opposition side of the House are suffering from. They should just be careful. If the virus gets loose in Australia they all will perish; that is for dead sure. One of the programs I would like to see implemented in Australia after we get rid of tuberculosis and brucellosis is the eradication of feral pigs. There is no way that we can eradicate foot and mouth disease in this country while we have millions and millions of wild pigs running around. I think that once we have finished the tuberculosis and brucellosis eradication program the industry and the Government ought to set their sights on getting rid of feral pigs.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (4.42)-in reply-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am forced to respond because, as usual, we have heard a number of inaccuracies from the Australian Labor Party spokesman. One thing the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) is noted for around the bush is being totally negative-a knocker without any positive plans for primary industry. The number of industry representatives who have asked me for clarification of the Australian Labor Party's rural policy plans is quite surprising. I always listen with some amusement when I hear the great Press releases that the honourable member for Werriwa issues about primary industry. I have yet to hear him say anything positive about primary industry anywhere. He is a great knocker, he has a great capacity to tell us all of the problems but he would not dare to try to give us one answer. He is not game. First of all, he does not know the answer and, secondly, the Labor Party will not

1466 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

support him. He goes around the countryside saying: 'Look at the question of tariff protection. The Government is providing all this terrible tariff protection '. Why does he not listen to his Deputy Leader on the question of tariff protection? Why does he not listen to other Opposition members who have said that they are for total protection, and they make no bones about it.
If the honourable member ever gets on the front bench on this side of the House, which the rural industry certainly hopes he will not, he will be a little mealy-mouthed fellow sitting in the corner. I have not yet heard the honourable member for Werriwa say something positive about a rural industry. I know of no Opposition policy at all that dots the i's and crosses the t's. Farmers have asked me: 'Is there a rural spokesman for the Labor Party in the Federal Parliament?' I said: 'Yes, they have a fellow called John Kerin'. They said: 'John who?' I said: 'John Kerin, the member for Werriwa. He took, I think it was Whitlam's seat'. They said: 'He is a proper successor to Whitlam'. That is all they could say about him. Anyway, I live in hope of hearing something positive from the honourable member at some time or other.
I visited the Cattlemen's Union of Australia the other day and thoroughly enjoyed a couple of hours there. The local Federal member was with me and he can verify what I am about to say. I answered questions for an hour and a half. It might hurt the honourable member for Werriwa to know this, but at the end I was given a hearty round of applause. I am sorry to disappoint him terribly. That is the sort of reception that I get around most of the countryside. He might find that hard to believe. Despite the allegations and questions about my honesty, I will place my honesty on the floor of this Parliament any time against the honesty of the honourable member for Werriwa, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) or any other member of the Labor Party. Let me deal with that matter.
It is interesting to note that the honourable member for Shortland attacked me in a speech the other night, accusing me of some lack of honesty in regard to the purchase of Omega land. The honourable member for Werriwa picked up the story today like a good song and ran with it hard, trying to make a point. Let me take the chance of answering the honourble member for Shortland. The honourable member for Werriwa might at least understand the facts. The honourable member for Shortland refuses to understand them. This matter goes back to 1977. The honourable member for Shortland accused me of misleading the House when I stated in part that I had

no knowledge of the activities of the Department of Administrative Services. He raised four points and I propose to answer those four points. I made it perfectly plain at the time, and it is recorded in Hansard-
Mr Milton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I would like to know what this has to do with the Bill in question.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr GiJes)-1 understand that the honourable member for Werriwa mentioned this topic a little while ago. If that is so I am quite prepared to give the Minister a chance to respond. It is my understanding that that is so. There is no point of order. The honourable member can leave the matter in the hands of the Chair. I will watch the Minister.
Mr NIXON-I have never denied-I made it plain to the honourable member for Shortland at the time-that I had been in touch with the Secretary of the Department of Administrative Services. I went on to explain that I rang the Secretary. I quote the words I used:
I did ring the head of the Department of Administrative Services because of reports which appeared in local newspapers in Gippsland to the effect that the Department was seeking to purchase land on which to site the Omega station. I sought from the head of the Department of Administrative Services an assurance that speculators could not get into the area ahead of the Department with the result that land values would become unreal.
That was one of the points that the honourable member for Shortland raised. I simply recount that incident to show the responsible attitude I took at the time. In addition the honourable member for Shortland-I point this out to the honourable member for Werriwa in the hope that he will understand it-tried to manufacture some intrigue about the fact that I had suggested that a local stock and station agent might be used in relation to the purchase of this land. I answered this in this Parliament on 4 November 1977. I made representations on behalf of the local stock and station agent who had rung me and had asked whether there were any opportunities for local stock and station agents to get the job of obtaining the land. There is nothing unusual about anybody, let alone a Minister, making representations on behalf of people who approach him. The honourable member for Shortland is guilty of a total misinterpretation of that matter.
On the matter of the price of the land, the honourable member for Shortland is guilty of misleading the House because he has quoted me completely out of context. On 9 September this year he said:
The second count on which the Minister misled the House was his claim that the price paid for the Omega land was the

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1467

price recommended by the taxation valuer, and his claim that the land had already been acquired.
That is a total distortion of what I actually told the Parliament. On 3 November 1977, I stated--
Mr Milton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I draw your attention again to the fact that we are dealing wih the Livestock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill and the Livestock Export Charges Amendment Bill. The Minister is referring to the honourable member for Shortland. He is not referring to any comments which were made by the honourable member for Werriwa. I ask you again to rule that this has nothing to do with the Bills which we are discussing.
Mr NIXON-Mr Deputy Speaker, on that point of order, I am referring directly to the comments made by the honourable member for Werriwa. I think he will acknowledge that if he is honest about it. I am referring directly to those comments.
Mr Milton-You are referring to the honourable member for Shortland.
Mr NIXON-I am answering the question so that the honourable member for Werriwa understands--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I suggest that the Minister deal with this matter as rapidly as possible. It is not strictly within the context of the Bill.
Mr NIXON-On 3 November 1977 I stated:
The price finally agreed upon was not the price Mr McDonald asked for but the price that the taxation valuer recommended to the Department of Administrative Services ought to be accepted.
That is totally different from what the honourable member for Shortland said. The fact that my response on 3 November was correct is borne out in a report by the Chief Property Officer of the Victorian branch to the Minister for Administrative Services dated 27 July 1977 in which he stated:
. . . it is considered that payment of the asking price of $164,000 is justified. The taxation valuer has strongly recommended purchase at this figure.
I am sorry to bring these matters up during the debate on these Bills. If the honourable member for Werriwa had not quoted the honourable member for Shortland in claiming that I had been misleading the House and that there was an element of dishonesty about my attitude I would not have used the debate on these Bills to answer the honourable member for Werriwa.
Mr Milton-You should have made a personal explanation. You did not need to use this time.

Mr NIXON-The matter was raised during this debate. If the honourable member had been in the House at the time he might have heard it. The honourable member for Werriwa then tried to connect that with an answer I gave in the House in relation to the inquiry into the meat processing industry. I point out to him-if he has any sense of decency at all he will understand it-that Senator Button asked a question of me in May. The question was answered during the parliamentary recess. The answer was certainly preparedI do not know on what date it was delivered to himbefore the Government had taken the decision on the Industries Assistanc:e Commission inquiry. The answer that was prepared during the recess was put in Hansard when the House resumed in August.
Mr Kerin-A month later.
Mr NIXON-Whatever the date was. The question was asked in May and an answer was prepared at that point. That answer was not changed and was put into Hansard when the House resumed in August. The Government took its decision on the lAC inquiry after the answer was prepared. It was a simple matter and it will not in any way affect the Government's decisions. The question which was asked alluded to an earlier request by the industry for assistance. We had said no to the points that the industry had raised with us. Since then the Government has decided to hold its own inquiry into the industry on different grounds. Certainly that answer will not affect in any way our judgment, when the lAC finally reports on what assistance we might have to give the industry. I make that clear to the honourable member for Werriwa.
I turn now to the question of drought. Again I draw to the attention of the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) that this is not related to the Bill either but if he had been listening to the honourable member for Werriwa he would have heard him alluding to drought. I therefore have to respond appropriately to what the honourable member for Werriwa had to say. I can understand the honourable member for Werriwa being sour on this question of drought. This was a case where the State Minister for Agriculture in New South Wales ginned up a tour of the drought districts in New South Wales.
Mr MacKenzie-A one-day wonder.
Mr NIXON-A one-day wonder. He took a plane load of media personalities and television cameramen around the State. He was really going to hand it to me and to the Commonwealth. He was really going to lay it on thick. He had the whole thing set up and, of course-

1468 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Live-stock Slaughter Levy Bill

Mr MacKenzie-A media poser.
Mr NIXON-Absolutely. He was really going to get stuck into the Commonwealth for its lack of activity. Unbeknown to him I had been preparing a Cabinet submission for some weeks. It was accepted in Adelaide. I was able to announce this decision, with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in Adelaide prior to the Minister for Agriculture making the tour. Instead of his going around the State of New South Wales and becoming a hero he became a mug and was given heaps. At every meeting to which he went he was given heaps and he did not like it. He complained at the Australian Agricultural Council that there was no consultation between the Commonwealth and the States. I felt like offering him a handkerchief. The honourable member for Werriwa has a drought plan. I would be interested to hear Senator Walsh's opinion of it because as I understand it-it is very hard to understand as the detail is very scarce-tax rebates will be used in part. As I understand Senator Walsh, he will abolish any tax rebates on assistance for water conservation. I think there will be some interesting arguments if the Opposition ever gets down to working out the detail of its policies on these matters.
I will not do what the honourable member for Werriwa does and spend all of my time in this debate knocking. That is his profession; he is a professional knocker. As he has nothing positive to say he is a professional knocker. I can knock every point that the honourable member for Werriwa put up. He is even sour because I have called the cattle industry together to help it decide its policy. They have policies everywhere at the moment. I said to the Cattlemen's Union of Australia: 'I will get you together after you have had your Cattle Council meeting in October and sort this thing out once and for all. I have had enough of it'. The honourable member is even sour about that. In all the honourable member's talk about cattle policies and strategies I have never heard him put up a policy on this issue on behalf of the Australian Labor Party. He posed all the problems and all the questions but gave no answers. That is a typical approach by the honourable member for Werriwa. I expect something better from him. I thought that he would do more homework. The sooner the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) gets down on the front bench and replaces him the better for everybody. At least he understands the farming industry and does not live in an academic ivory tower. At least he has some idea of what farming is about. I welcome the fact that the Australian Labor Party is supporting this measure. I have nothing further to say at this point.

Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
LIVE-STOCK EXPORT CHARGE AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 19 August, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
DRIED FRUITS EXPORT CHARGES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.56}-As much as I would like to speak about meat and droughts, I guess I had better speak about dried vine fruits. However, might I say that I accept the explanation given by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), in his reply to the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill, with respect to the conflict between an answer he had given and the announcement of the inquiry into the meat processing sector. I point out that meat industry representatives asked me to settle that question directly in the debate on that Bill today.
The Opposition is not opposed to the Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Bill. The purpose of the Bill is to establish a new ceiling on the export charge leviable on currants, sultanas and raisins now that the operative rate of the charge has been increased by regulation to the maximum allowed under the existing Act. The moneys collected under the Dried Fruit Export Charges Bill are used to finance the operations of the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation, which controls the export marketing and overseas promotion of Australian dried fruit. The Corporation has been under financial pressure due in part to the poor

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1469

1981 harvest, with a consequent sharp fall in receipts in the 1981-82 financial year, but more importantly to steadily rising costs. Action to improve its current financial position has already been taken with industry agreement by Statutory Rules 1982 No. 100 proclaimed on 29 April 1982. There has been an increase in the operative rate of charge from $4.50 a tonne in April 1982 to $7 a tonne, and it will go up to $15 a tonne as a maximum. That is quite a rise. I will raise some points later on if the Minister is not too sensitive about the coming approach in respect of these levies. The Opposition w0uld like more explanation in one or two instances.
Industry production in the 1983 season is forecast to be about 75,000 tonnes, 27 per cent below the level in 1982. As I have already said, because of the huge 1982 pack and the difficulties experienced in disposing of the fruit on export markets, a carry over of 25 kilotonnes to the 1983 season could occur. This would increase the availability of dried vine fruit in 1983 to 100 kilotonnes. With a domestic market forecast to absorb 29 kilotonnes during 1983, the industry will be looking to sell the remaining 71 kilotonnes on overseas markets. The prospects for dried vine fruit on export markets in the short to medium term are best described as unstable. Several key factors will determine whether Australian exporters can expect reasonably to sell the exportable surplus of the dried vine fruit during 1983. These include the policy adopted by the European Economic Community to assist Greek producers to dispose of their 1982 crop; the size of the 1982 Northern Hemisphere pack, which will be harvested in September and October-that is, now-the new season's selling prices adopted by the Australian fruit industry early in 1983; the quality of Australia's export fruits; and the likely level of competition for export sales in the non-EEC markets.
The current indications are that the northern hemisphere crop for this year is only average, but with the prospect that a substantial quantity of Greece's 1981 pack will still be unsold at the beginning of the new Northern Hemisphere buying season, a world surplus of dried vine fruit will still exist in 1983. Therefore, the unit export return to Australian packers for sales in 1983 has been estimated at $900 a tonne, similar to the unit return last year. Returns to packers for dried vine fruits sold on the domestic market during 1983 are expected to average $1,365 a tonne, 5 per cent above the level in 1982. The industry outlook is not all that bright. It has had problems with climate. The industry is centred mainly in the electorates of the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) and the honourable member for

Wakefield (Mr Giles), who is not here. The industry is concentrated mainly along the Murray River between Robinvale and Waikerie, as most honourable members are aware.
The comments we would like to make in relation to this matter-again understanding that the Minister is a bit sensitive-is that the levy was increased from $4 to $7 in April this year. The reason was to bail the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation out of its financial difficulties. That is fair enough, but this Bill seeks to increase the maximum levy to $15. The reason is to obviate the need for further amendment to the Act for a reasonable number of years. Decisions on when to increase the levy over the range of $7 to $15 are now to be made by the Department of Primary Industry and the producers' organisation, the Australian Dried Fruits Association.
These changes raise a number of questions. Is the stated reason for the amendment to the legislation a sufficient reason? What prompted the decision to provide the ADFC with what is essentially an open-ended levy? We would like to know whether this practice is likely to be followed by other industries. Obviously, it is not intended for the livestock industry because the levy for that industry is to be increased by the usual narrow margin. We have just spoken about that matter. The possible extension of the practice of setting an open-ended levy prompts a number of general concerns. At present there is very little opportunity for public scrutiny of the operations of the statutory marketing authorities which influence the conditions under which many of Australia's primary products are marketed. The need for any increase in levies to be debated in Parliament provides one of the few opportunities for the activities of the statutory marketing authorities to be considered publicly. The onus, to some degree, should be on the statutory marketing authorities to justify the need for increased levies. The SMA should be fully accountable to growers for the use of their money. That is, the principle underlying the levy should be to create the least possible imposition on growers rather than to move to an open-ended system which carries with it little incentive for the statutory authorities to operate in the most cost-effective way.
The industry got into financial difficulties because of the poor season in 1981. We are not debating whether it needs this extra money for its promotional activities, research activities and the running of the Corporation. But if the ADFC experiences further financial difficulties-I have already pointed to the market outlook-the levy could be abruptly raised to the proposed maximum of $15 a tonne. A reasonable question to ask

1470 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

is whether providing this open-ended levy is likely to solve the ADFC's problems or whether a more fundamental set of changes in the Corporation or the industry are required.
The Minister might say that these are academic questions but I think that there is a need, when there is so much criticism by growers in respect of statutory marketing authorities, to look at some of these questions. The industry, in terms of the contact I have had with growers, is concerned with the levying by the Department of Primary Industry of the inspection charges and costs. Industry representatives are saying that the system of inspection by the DPI may need some change. When the DPI carried out inspections and did not charge no one questioned the procedures in train in those days. But since the Review of Commonwealth Functions, or the razor gang inquiry, last year growers say that now they have to pay for it there has been a trebling of costs, and the system is fouled up. I do not know the truth of those allegations, but certainly quite a few growers have grizzled to me about that matter.
As honourable members know, 80 per cent of the pack is packed by co-operatives and the rest is packed by private packers. Again, growers have come to me-perhaps the Minister can explain this-complaining that there have been some things going on that they do not understand. For a long time the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation had one agent overseas, but I am informed that the Robinvale growers are finding the present situation difficult; they joined with the Riverland. Now we tend to have two overseas agents for Australian dried vine fruit. Offices have been opened in London, Canada and Tokyo. If there are two overseas agents for our dried vine fruit there is the risk that the buyers will play one group off against the other.
I am informed also of some dissatisfaction by growers with respect to some of the appointments to the Corporation by the Minister. Those complaints came particularly from Mildura. Perhaps the honourable member for Mallee can inform the House of the background to that. A moment ago I said that this Bill provides us with a good chance to talk about statutory marketing authorities in general. As honourable members know, they are coming under more and more criticism, whether it be by Senator Rae's Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations or by the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation. All political parties should be concerned about the way those statutory authorities operate. The Liberal Party is quite concerned about the way they operate. In May 1982 the Liberal Party Federal Council deliberated on and

passed a resolution on a marketing board review. That resolution reads:
That this Federal Council believes that Marketing Boards, with powers of compulsory acquisition, levy and monopoly marketing, are contrary to Liberal philosophy and supports the existence of Marketing Boards, private sector or Government-owned, established by statute or otherwise, providedthat-
no Board has the power of compulsory purchase;
no Board has a statutory monopoly on sale;
no Board has the power to exact a compulsory levy from purchasers;
no Board has the power to determine the variety of goods produced;
the administrative and marketing expenses, in the case of statutory boards are met from the commission on sales;
no Board should have an inspectorate with powers of entry, search or seizure of commodities without warrant.
I have already said that this is directly aimed at the processes and the actions of the Australian Wheat Board. But it would pose a threat to the other marketing boards, corporations and statutory marketing authorities if this bit of Liberal philosophy is ever implemented. I am not suggesting that this Government is going to implement this, but it is very alarming that this is Liberal philosophy and that this should be the policy of the Federal Liberal Party. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has tried to wriggle out of it on a couple of occasions. The primary industry organisations-one has only to look at the Livestock and Grain Producers Association, the Queensland Grain Growers Association or the National Farmers Federation-have expressed profound doubts about this new bit of Liberal philosophy. They are very concerned. As I have said, I think it is legitimate for political parties and the Parliament to look at the activities of the statutory marketing authorities in general.
The Australian Labor Party does not take the view the Liberal Party takes on this matter. We believe that statutory marketing authorities are essential for the marketing of Australia's primary industry commodities because they are the only way that growers can influence the sale of their products on international markets in particular. It is interesting to note that many primary producers regard the statutory marketing authorities as grower financed and, therefore, entirely grower organisations. Recently this was drawn out in a speech by the General Manager of the Australian Wheat Board. He said that the first question people should ask is to whom a board-in the case of the Wheat Board-a corporation or a stautory marketing authority is responsible. If one looks at the Acts governing SMAs one can see that the answer is that they are responsible through the

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1471

Minister to the Parliament and, ultimately, to the people.
In the case of the Wheat Board and in many other instances, the majority view of the producers and their organisations is that the board or corporation is the marketing arm of that industry. They regard it simply in those terms. In a speech I made a short time ago about the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, the grower organisations' attitude towards it and some of the confusions that exist, I said that again there is this conflict. The growers seem to think that because these organisations are funded by them-despite the fact that there is an Act of Parliament to give them monopoly trading powers-they are their organisations alone and that they are not responsible to the Parliament. By granting monopoly powers to the authorities in the market-place the Government provides considerable assistance to many primary producers. In practice the SMAs are in many cases as much consumer funded as grower funded organisations.
A necessary consequence of the legislated monopoly powers under which they operate is that the links between the SMAs and the Government should be just as strong, although different in form, as the links between the authorities and the producers. In other words, SMAs which manipulate the domestic product price as part of their operations must be accountable to government. If we take the industry we are speaking about at present, the ADFC sets the domestic price and there is a consumer transfer. Present accountability is currently exercised through the requirement that the SMAs submit annual reports to Parliament and that they are subject to audit by the Auditor-General. However, the effectiveness of these essentially passive forms of accountability is being increasingly questioned.
That is why there is so much farmer organised opposition to the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations. That has become an instrument for examining annual reports and auditors' reports and finally for discharging the responsibility of government to growers and consumers. It has become a sort of watch-dog. It is resented and I would suggest that it is causing some questions for the Government. It is the only on the spot calling into account to which growers and consumers currently have access. But as recent events have indicated, the existing system does not ensure an adequate flow of information from the SMAs to government.
I am not attacking these SMAs. I am just simply saying that it is a very legitimate concern

of government, of political parties and of the Parliament that these SMAs should be examined. The industry organisations do not represent 100 per cent of the producers. There is no other way any government can get around the problem. In some cases, only about 40 per cent or 50 per cent of the producers actually belong to the organisation. Yet it is the organisation which is making the policies for them. It is the growers' fault if they do not belong to their respective organisation and exercise their democratic rights. But I still think, if we are going to talk about accountability, that there is a need to look at the organisations.
It is often argued that if the SMAs are to operate effectively on world markets greater commercial flexibility is required. Again this proposition is not disputed. Rather the concern is that, given their existing structure, some of the SMAs may not be in a position to exploit effectively increased commercial flexibility. As they are currently structured, membership of the boards of the SMAs is largely in the hands of industry organisations. Greater consideration needs to be given to the role of professionals in the marketing authorities and to splitting the role of the industry dominated boards from that of the professional staff in the authorities. The ALP's view is that the role of the boards should be to determine the broad direction to be taken in relation to the marketing of products-a role which is analogous to that taken by the boards of most major companies. It is the role of the professional staffthe marketing specialists-to direct the day to day activities associated with international and domestic marketing.
I think the role and function of these marketing authorities has to be set out in a much better form. Going back to the last debate on the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation the basic problem with that Corporation is that it does not have a clearly defined role and function. It is only by the slow effiuxion of time that that is being spelt out for them. In the current crisis there are all sorts of plans, as the Minister has said. But there really is a need to knock some heads together and get some clear thinking. If the role and function of the organisations are speJt out one then has to look very closely at their structure. That gets on to what I was talking about a moment ago-the separation of policy from management. If one reads some of the the things that people on the Wheat Board and the other authorities have been saying, one can see that there is a need for this flexibility to which I have been referring. There is a need for the grower members-the people who fund these organisations-to determine policies in the broader sense and for professional mangement to

1472 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

be hired. It does not have to be Sir William Gunn's $1 OOm super-beef seller. But those people need to be professionals rather than growers still engaged in growing the product.
Once the board is set up and the composition and responsibility of the members has been decided, one can look at various methods of election. There are different forms of election. The ALP has no objection to having industry conferences, organisations themselves nominating members, there being an election at large or the Minister simply nominating some of those people on the authorities. I turn to ministerial responsibility and the matter of when the Minister has to sign. In the Wheat Board's case he has to sign everything in cases where it spends over, I think, $100,000. He has to decide how much delegation of authority is desirable and recommendable for the authority in question as well as the degree of Public Service control. In the AMLC proposals-or whatever they are going to be replaced with-some are saying that there should not be any Public Service Act control of the authorities. They point to the Australian Wool Corporation. It seemed to be a lot more flexible than the Australian Wheat Board. I think this needs to be examined in a fair amount of detail.
Finally, I get back to accountability. I have gone over the various kinds of accountability. It seems to me that there are two kinds of accountability. Firstly, there needs to be accountability to the Parliament for the money, for the auditing of the accounts which show how that organisation is meeting its obligations to the industry and how it is meeting its obligations with respect to the Act of Parliament that gives it the monopoly power. Secondly, there should be accountability to the Government, quite apart from the Parliament, and that has to be an interactive relationahip. The Minister for Primary Industry and the Government have to ensure that it is an efficient marketing organisation and that it is acting in the interests of the industry. In turn, the Corporation has to convince the Minister that it is acting in the interests of the industry at all times.
I have digressed from the Bill to some degree because, as we are dealing today with two of the II statutory marketing authorities involved in agricultural marketing for which the Commonwealth sets up Acts, it is a sensible time to talk on some aspects of the authorities, the way they are running, the increasing scrutiny they are coming under and the increasing doubts being expressed by primary producer organisatons and primary producers. The Opposition does not oppose this Bill.

Mr FISHER (Mallee) (5.l7)-The Government, with the agreement of the Australian dried fruits industry, seeks to establish in the Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Bill a new ceiling on the export charge that is leviable on currants, sultanas and raisins. the funds that will be collected under this Bill will be used to finance the operation of the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation, which today controls the export marketing and overseas promotion of Australian dried vine fruit. As the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) said, the Corporation has been under extreme financial pressure due, in part, to a poor 1981 harvest. This has seen a consequential sharp fall in receipts in the 1981-82 financial year. The Bill that is before the House seeks to raise the maximum permissible charge from $7 to $15 a tonne in order to enable the operative rate to be increased beyond $7 a tonne if or when this becomes necessary. It is expected that the new ceiling will obviate the need for further amendments to the Act for a number of years.
At present the Australian dried fruits industry in Australia and throughout the world is in chaos. This confusion has been created, I believe, by the European Economic Community not developing correct procedures for the marketing of dried fruits produced in Greece. Since August 1980 sultana prices have fallen from some $US2,000 a tonne to $USI,OOO a tonne. The price received by growers in Australia at present is well below the actual cost of production. I believe it can be assumed by the actions of the EEC that it has created a price war in the marketing of dried fruits to justify its action of placing quantitative limitations on Third World countries. The marketing situation is that Australia's large 1982 crop was harvested with some 8,900 tonnes of 1981 fruit still unsold. Unfortunately, because of the season this carry over was of relatively low grades and has moved only slowly. At present about 3,000 tonnes of fruit still remain unsold. At the same time, the export market situation is also clouded, with the 1981 northern hemisphere crops coming onto the market.
Turkey has been able to undercut the Greek quotations for fruit resulting from the over generous EEC regime for dried fruit. This further reduced prices when the EEC invited tenders of a somewhat lower price. Turkey was also helped in selling its fruit by the strength of the United States dollar in which its trade takes place. The result has been that the whole Turkish crop has been cleared with very little of the Greek crops exported. This has depressed world markets and there has been uncertainty in the general trading of dried vine fruit. The result has been that little

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1473

Greek fruit has been sold. I understand that some 60,000 tonnes still remain unsold. The market prospects for the world dried fruit crop are also not good. The 1982 northern hemisphere crops are likely to be large, with large crops in Greece and Turkey and a substantial crop in California, which has been influenced by diversions of grapes away from wine. I understand that in California dried fruit growers have asked for a $45m subsidy to assist growers in the industry.
It is important in the context of this Bill to look at the background and the effects of Greece's entry into the EEC and the effect of that entry on the marketing of Australian dried vine fruits. The EEC has traditionally been a major outlet for the Australian product. It was worth $38m in 1980-81 and in 1981-82 it was worth $20.7m. Following Greece's ascension to full EEC membership last year, the EEC regime for dried fruit was adopted. This included guaranteed minimum prices, production aids, storage aids, compensatory payments and other forms of assistance. The minimum price paid to Greek producers in 1981 meant that the price was too high to attract buyers and EEC attempts to sell by tendering had not achieved any significant movement of the 1981 crop. The high EEC support and attempts to dispose of the Greek crop have unsettled world trade, unfortunately at a time of world surplus. The 1982 Greek crop is presently being harvested and there are reports that some of the 1981 carry over will have to be distilled.
Minimum prices and production aids proposed for the 1982 crop this season have been further increased by some 23 per cent. It is obvious that the EEC has not learned its lesson of the previous year and is only going to complicate the marketing of dried vine fruits throughout the world again this season. Another result has been that the Greeks seem likely to forsake its traditional Eastern bloc markets for the captive EEC market, which will displace traditional Third World country suppliers, such as Australia, to a significant extent. It is interesting to note that Greece previously sold about two-thirds of its total production in the Eastern bloc countries. Recently in Brussels our post has heard that the EEC Commission may also be considering a minimum import price arrangement. While this could improve stability of the EEC market at prices above recent world market levels, it will have the effect of reducing imports from non-EEC sources.
The Australian Government has endeavoured, through several representations in its Brussels post, to take action to alleviate this difficult marketing situation. This action has been aimed at maintaining access for Australian fruit to the

EEC at remunerative prices. We have also protested at the high levels of subsidisation of Greek fruit, and these messages have also been delivered to the EEC delegation in Canberra. The Chairman of the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation met with EEC officials in July 1981 and did so again recently to discuss the effect of the regime in the EEC upon the Australian dried fruit industry. In discussions with the industry a proposal has been put to me that the industry would like to change radically its marketing structure. At present the marketing structure for dried fruits is quite different from that for wheat, for instance. The dried fruit industry markets its own product. The Australian Dried Fruits Corporation promotes and controls the exports of dried vine fruit and its sale and distribution after export. A provision is made for the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation to buy and sell and otherwise trade in dried vine fruit if the Minister for Primary Industry approves and subject to any conditions he may make. I make the point that this provision has never been used.
The Corporation's predecessor, the Australian Dried Fruits Control Board, had the power to sell fruit placed under its control, but this power had also not been used since 1926. On the other hand, the Australian Wheat Board is responsible for the marketing of wheat and wheat products sold overseas. The Australian Wheat Board makes a guaranteed minimum price payment to growers shortly after the delivery of wheat to it. At present the guaranteed minimum price is 95 per cent of the average of returns for the last two seasons and the estimated return for the subject season. Of course, further payments are made if proceeds of sale permit. To finance the first payment the Australian Wheat Board borrows from the Rural Credits Department of the Reserve Bank of Australia but a statutory 12-month repayment period applies and this, of course, is subject to ministerial approval from commercial markets and the Wheat Finance Fund.
I mention this because issues are arising within the Australian dried fruit industry which I believe need very careful consideration. Whilst there may be some advantage in changing its present structure I think we also should recognise that there would be some disadvantages. One disadvantage, of course, could be a suggested reduction in the following season's intake to offset an abnormally high carry over. It should also be appreciated by the dried fruit industry that the interest rate charged by the Rural Credits Department is high and will, in the end, accrue to growers' accounts. However, it must be admitted that that interest rate is nowhere near as high at present as many of

1474 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

the packing houses are paying to obtain finance. It should also be appreciated that the Government is presently underwriting a 90 per cent return which will rise to 95 per cent in the 1985 season on dried sultanas. The industry has to ask itself whether there is sufficient reason to pursue a fundamental change in its marketing structure. This is a vital issue. The Government will assist this industry in developing a marketing structure which will best serve its long term interests and the viability of the communities that depend upon it.
Our Government has responded to the needs and proposals put to it by the industry over many years. Dried vine fruit stabilisation schemes operated from 1964 to 1968, from 1971 to 1976 and from 1978 to 1980. The last scheme in operation operated for sultanas only. The schemes generally operated on an indexed cost of production basis and were referenced to the average returns from dried fruit sales. The last scheme was terminated at the request of the industry as a result of the very high export market prices. Growers were finding that they were paying a record amount into the scheme. They requested that the Government terminate it as high export prices would have resulted in further grower contributions in the 1979 and 1980 seasons. The legislation establishing the scheme was repealed and moneys remaining in the fund were dispersed for payment to growers.
Of course, this year, in March 1982 the dried sultana production underwriting scheme was introduced. the underwriting scheme was accepted by the Government as put forward by the Australian Dried Fruits Association. It was designed to provide support in the event of a sudden sharp downturn in prices. I point out that underwriting will not provide on-going assistance in the event of a sustained trend to low export prices. As I said earlier, the guaranteed minimum return was set at 90 per cent of the three average returns in the 1982, 1983 and 1984 seasons, to rise to 95 per cent in 1985 and 1986. Due to the relatively low export prices for fruit in the 1982 season it seems, however, that payments will be due in respect of the 1982 season's sultana production. It was interesting to note that in the budget $2.lm was made available for possible repayment under this scheme. It is my suggestion that the industry could approach the Government to raise its first advance in the coming seasons to 95 per cent which may in some way alleviate the difficulties it is facing.
Mr Deputy Speaker, you are well aware from your electorate of the importance of the viability of our diverse horticultural industries

complementing each other. It is important, therefore, that governments provide support to all industries to try to protect their well being. This Government showed that support in the last Budget. It did not place an excise on wine. It did not impose a sales tax on the fruit juice industry. I am confident that the Minister will ensure that the citrus industry receives adequate protection when the time comes for such decisions to be made. This Bill strengthens the financial role of the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation. In doing
so, it provides that Corporation with the means to market better and promote the Australian dried fruit industry. It warrants the support of this House. I am pleased that the Opposition indicates its support.
Mr GILES (Wakefield) (5.30)-1 will not keep the House for very long. I point out that I was in the chair when the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) was speaking. I left the chair to go outside. The proper way of doing that is to disappear through one of the two doors. I thought it was a trifle unfair of the honourable member to accuse me-so I was informed when I was out of the chamber-of not being present when the interests of my electors were evidently at heart. If that was so, I object to those sorts of tactics.
I will comment on two matters very briefly. First, I was struck by the excellent speech of the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher). On matters of this nature, of course, we work very closely together as two individuals. In this case, as my electorate processes less and less vine fruit into the dried commodity and more and more into the wine side of the industry, the electorate of Mal\ee processes a great deal of its product into the dried fruit area. It is quite proper that the honourable member for Mallee should be the main spokesman on occasions such as this as he is a very excellent representative of the industry. I do not seek, therefore, for a variety of reasons to intrude on the excellent speech made by him.
I was struck as he was speaking by the total\y different approach of the two sides of politics to the question of industry representation and policy. I have never heard it put more clearly than I did this afternoon when the honourable member for Mallee said that the industry itself must question its future marketing policy-I think they were the words he used. This, of course, is absolutely true. He then went on to propound the thesis that this Government would help the industry in any way that it decided would be the most efficient method of disposing of its crop to the advantage of its individual members. How different this is to the view of the honourable member for Werriwa who said: 'The honourable

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1475

member for Wakefield is not here when I am making my speech on the industry. If we were in government this is what we would do for the industry'. There is a totally different philosophical principle. I hope that all small industries, quite apart from the dried fruit industry, realise the differences between the basic policies of the two parties.
After all the heavy work that the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) and all members of the Government have done to try to punch a little sense, a little economic realism into the European Economic Community, its action in relation to the dried fruit industry is really past all belief. We have all sat back and watched the EEC do some pretty frightful things in the area of economic unreality in the past. We have all, no doubt, in our own small way, had plenty to say about it. But at this late stage, to see exactly what it has done in the case of the dried fruit industry is, to me, absolutely past belief. It is really quite ludicrous. If any region, nation or area of the world believes it can operate in this high-handed, unrealistic fashion, the people who live in those areas should have a good look at the their hierarchy and what it is doing to them. We cannot expect the consumers and the people who find the cash in the European Economic Community to put up any longer with the inane and stupid methods that it is adopting currently in relation to the dried fruit industry.
I will not go into the several processes that the EEC is adopting. We are all well aware that we were warned in years gone by not to expect to remain a client of the Common Market, nor were we some years ago when we were restructuring the dried fruit industry as you might remember, Mr Deputy Speaker. What happened then? There was a dearth of dried fruit in world markets. Wrongly or rightly we gave way and sold our produce to England and to the Common Market. I am damn sorry that we did. I am damn sorry that we had to provide produce to such an irresponsible group as it fundamentally is. Now we again are left without any markets. If it had not been for our pockets and the goodness of our producers in supplying them over those years we would have been much further along the way to rationalising our markets.
We have to start again now with markets that do not have the affluence of the European Economic Community and such areas. There are areas where we have to go in hard-the Arabian nations, China, India and others. If we do not do this-this now gets back to the interests of the honourable member for Wakefield perhaps contrary to the interests of the honourable member

for Mallee-an enormous tonnage of dried fruit could be visited back on the wine industry. The debacle in that industry is quite bad enough without dual varieties of grapes. By that I mean one variety of grapes being substituted for another. I support the Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Bill very heartily. I hope that the House will forgive me for making some pointed remarks in this instance.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (5.36)-in reply-I congratulate the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) and the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) for their contributions. I am pleased on this occasion also to be able to say that the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) and I share a fairly common view in relation to some of the remarks he made, particularly with respect to statutory authorities. The Government has always stood ready to provide, through the Parliament, a statutory authority for any industry that believes that that is the best way it can get itself together, market its goods and provide levies for research and other things that it wants. My comment the other day to the Cattlemen's Union of Australia that 'You can have the industry, I don't want it' followed an impassioned speech by somebody present in which it was said that the cattlemen did not want a statutory authority, that they could go it alone. I made the point that they do not need to come to government if they feel so independent, if they feel they can raise their levies in a voluntary fashion outside. The imposition of the levy would need to be on a voluntary basis. I can think of a lot of producers who would not kick into a voluntary levy to see other people spending the funds overseas. Being a producer I would have second thoughts about it myself. Quite honestly, I would ask for some accountability if it were done that way instead of through the Parliament. I say that as a light aside.
The fact is that statutory authorities playa very important role in a number of rural industries throughout this country. The Government has been looking very closely at the role of statutory authorities, not with any view to disbanding them, as some might claim or pretend, but simply with a view to ensuring that there is proper accountability to the Parliament and that proper flexibility is given to them for their commercial operations. Since I have been Minister I have been at pains to try to encourage commercial flexibility in the statutory authorities under my control. Indeed, one of the purposes of the Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Bill-the honourable member for Werriwa raised this matter-in increasing the levy on dried fruit exported from

1476 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Dried Fruits Export Amendment Bill

$7 to $15 a tonne without having to come back to the Parliament was to ensure that flexibility obtains. I point out to the honourable member for Werriwa-he was obviously unaware of thisthat this system has been adopted by the dried fruits industry for many years. It is not new to t.he dried fruits industry; it is new to other industries. Its purpose is to ensure that when the industry believes that the time is ripe for further promotion, research or activity it does not have to wait for a Bill to come before the Parliament. Parliament may be in recess or the legislation may get caught in a heavy Budget session and be low in priority compared with other legislation. By this system we are able to lift the levy at any time the industry seeks that to be done. Let me assure the honourable member for Werriwa that this will not be done without proper consideration of all the factors involved, and certainly not without the Australian Dried Fruits Association in this case making a recommendation to me in respect of it.
The honourable member for Werriwa raised also the question of the introduction of charging for Department of Primary Industry inspection work. We introduced a charge for export inspection in January 1981-the charge is $5.50 a tonne-on the principle of the user pays. Domestic inspection is done by DPI inspectors on behalf of the States. The Commonwealth charges the States. It has done so for many years. The States levy the producers. The Commonwealth has decided to charge the full cost from 1982. I point out that costs have increased through inflation. Implementation of this charge was deferred until 1982 at the State boards' request. In the meantime the DPI has been working with State boards and industry to minimise the burden of the system. We are trying to rationalise the inspection systems. One of the things that the user pays system has done has been to expo.se a lot of weaknesses, abuses and overmanning and a lack of efficiency and economies in the system. By having the user pay the industry is not so keen to have idle people standing around plants waiting for a peak period in the year when they might properly be employed. So, we are getting a better system as a result of the user pays principle. I hope that answers the question raised by the honourable member for Werriwa. Finally, I congratulate once again the other honourable members for their contribution to the debate.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
BOUNTY (SHIPS) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrHodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (5.42)-The substantive purpose of the Bounty (Ships) Amendment Bill 1982 is to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980 so that fishing vessels which are over 150 gross construction tons and which do not exceed 21 metres in length will become eligible for bounty. To that extent, the Opposition supports the inclusion of these vessels in that class of vessels which is eligible for bounty. However, let the House not necessarily accept the explanation made by the Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) about the need for this amendment. I have some doubt whether that was an entirely adequate explanation. The Minister suggested that the amendment is being made because it was never the Government's intention to exclude this class of vessels from being eligible for bounty.
Mr Hodgman-That is right.
Mr HURFORD-The Minister said that that is right. Let me remind him and the House that in the debate on the original Bounty (Ships) Act it was none other than the honourable member for Adelaide-yours truly-who drew to the attention of the House that the Act in question discriminated against the small fishermen by excluding the very class of vessel which today the Minister seeks to include in the eligible category. I draw attention to Hansard of 27 March 1980, pages 1339 and 1340, which I am sure the Minister has already read avidly if he has been properly briefed on this matter. On that occasion, I repeat, I drew attention to the fact that because this class of vessel that is now becoming eligible was to be subject to tariff the small fishermen would have to pay a relatively higher price than other persons buying larger ships. That, I believe, was so. I am glad that the position has now been corrected. I wonder why it has taken two and a half years for this correction finally to be made. The fact is that for two and a half years those small fishermen who were in my view the subject of discrimination have had to suffer because the Government had not got on with the job of amending the Act earlier. They had to suffer because of that tardiness and, indeed, because of the original mistakes

Bounty (Ships) Amendment Bill

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1477

that were made. For two and a half years the small fisherman has had to suffer because the Government could not get its act together both initially to draft the legislation properly and also to amend the legislation quickly after I had drawn attention to the anomaly. To state that it was not the Government's intention to exclude these vessels is, on the evidence before me, misleading because when I drew the attention of the House to the fact that these vessels were being excluded the alteration might well have been made at that time in the Senate.
The question which now must be asked is: Who was responsible for the original mistake and who was responsible for the delay? We are finding that in other areas there have been delays of this sort. Indeed there is the famous case of the Attorney General's Crown law office in Perth that at the moment is being considered by this House. Was the delay in amending the legislation brought about by delay in receiving the opinion of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) on this matter? Was the delay due to overwork by people in the office of the draftsman? Perhaps someone in the Department of Industry and Commerce put it in his bottom drawer for a little while. We have read about certain files being put in bottom drawers and being forgotten about. Given the same concerns being raised in the context of tax avoidance, I trust the Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce will give the House a full explanation for the delays in this case. In the meantime I ask: Would it be a fact that a substantial number of small fishermen who would have been able-had the Government acted on my advice before-to purchase their fishing vessels at a lower price have been subject to higher prices in the meantime? I know that no vessels have been built that have fallen into this category and therefore missed out on the bounty. I doubt whether the Minister would know the answer to this question, but because there was no bounty available have these small fishermen gone overseas to purchase vessels and paid duty on them? I would be very glad to get the answer. It would be very sad if any small fishermen have been ripped off in this way when it is two and a half years since I drew attention to this anomaly.
I turn now to the wording of the amendment. In my view it is regrettable that the Bill has been drafted in the way in which it has. I think an awfully ambiguous form of drafting has been used. Does it have to be so? Under the Bounty ~Ships) Act 1980 a ship is eligible for bounty if it IS a 'bountiable vessel' in accordance with the definition of section 3 of that Act. A bountiable

vessel as defined is to be amended to not include inter alia:
A vessel of 150 gross construction tons or less, not being a fishing vessel the length of which on the designed load water line exceeds 21 metres.
It is clear enough that excluded for bounty purposes are vessels of less than 150 gross construction tons. What is ambiguous in my view is whether a fishing vessel of more than 150 gross construction tons, but less than 21 metres, is eligible for bounty. Arguably the amendment could be read to exclude from bounty all vessels of 150 gross construction tons or less except for those fishing vessels which exceed 21 metres. The effect of such an interpretation would be to render all fishing vessels greater than 21 metres eligible for bounty. This is precisely the opposite intention, as I understand it, of the amendment.
I have noted somewhere an opinion with which I do not agree to the effect that the Minister has some ability. I have not noted it myself. I hope that in this case I will find that I am wrong and that he will be able to apply his talents in explaining to me the wording of the Bill, which I think is enormously ambiguous. While it is accepted that it is possible to read the amendment so that it does include the class of ships in question, it is regrettable that by using a very convoluted drafting style, involving ambiguous double negatives, the amendment will create uncertainty and possibly later needless litigation. In other words, would the Minister please use any talents he has got in getting drafting styles improved so that there is no ambiguity?
In these circumstances I have some hesitation in supporting the Bill until I have heard the Minister's reply. Perhaps the Minister will be able to explain the situation when he makes his reply, so until then I am giving him the benefit of the doubt. If I am right and if his explanations are satisfactory that will be pleasing to me because my support of the Bill will not be wasted.
MrGROOM (Braddon) (5.51)-Wehavejust heard an unusually immodest speech by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford). I did not realise that he is the man who discovered the oversight in the drafting of the Bounty (Ships) Bill. I certainly will take time to read his speech just to check on the matters he raised. One of the interesting facts about the Bounty (Ships) Amendment Bill is that it will be retrospective. Retrospectivity is a very topical issue. It is not uncommon, of course, for rights and entitlements of this kind to be created retrospectively. Perhaps that is the most exciting aspect of the Bill. The Bill is a valuable piece of legislation. It will certainly assist the fishing industry and those people around

1478 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Bounty (Ships) Amendment Bill

Australia who are building fishing boats. Of course, the fishing industry is very important in Tasmania. I welcome the legislation. The honourable member for Adelaide has explained the background to the Bill and therefore I do not intend to go into those details. I simply say that I welcome
the fact that the Government has now decided to overcome the problem that existed with the definition of bountiable vessels in the principal
Act.
I make one point that I believe directly relates to the Bill. It concerns the need to find a vessel to replace the Empress of Australia when it is taken off the run, probably about 1985. This is a very important issue in Tasmania, particularly for those people living on the north-west coast. We have had a Senate inquiry into passenger transport to and from Tasmania which considered both sea transport and air transport. That Committee handed down a valuable report with some very sound recommendations. It recommended that if there is to be one vessel to replace the Empress it should ply between Port Phillip and Devonport. If there are to be two vessels the Committee recommended that they should ply
between Port Phillip-or Melbourne-and both Devonport and Burnie. I indicate now to the Government and to the Minister, who happens to be a Tasmanian and who I know is very concerned about and interested in this issue, that I support those recommendations. Devonport is a very central port in Tasmania. It is a very attractive area. The Devonport Marine Board has a great deal of expertise which it has developed over very many years. It has expert personnel. I think Devonport is the ideal port to which the replacement vessel for the Empress should go. I trust that the Government will look very carefully at that and will support that concept.
The Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt), I know, is very interested. He has already started rolling the process of finding a replacement vessel. He has called for indications of interest from various bodies around Australia to see who might be able to provide the appropriate shipping service between Tasmania and the mainland. I understand that he has received a number of indications of interest from quite a large number of companies and individuals. It will be worthwhile seeing just what we come up with. The important point is that this is a very important issue for Tasmania and a vitally important issue for the north-west coast and for the people who live in that area and are represented by both the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) and myself. We are both very keen to see the best possible service provided for Tasmania. I am sure

the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) will agree with me when I say that on this kind of issue we as Tasmanians must be united.
One of the problems is that in Tasmania sometimes we can be too parochial. We look at our own little neck of the woods and not at the State in to to. We have to try to look at the whole State. If we look at the whole State and at all the facts objectively and without bias, we will come to only one sensible conclusion; that is, that the replacement vessel should go to Devonport.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The Chair, belatedly perhaps, should acquaint the honourable member for Braddon with the fact that he was peripherally relevant. I could not quite satisfy myself whether he had in mind a new vessel for the Strait of 21 feet or 150 tons.
Mr GROOM-If during my speech, Mr Deputy Speaker, you had raised that matter, I would have explained the relevance.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER--The honourable member may resume his seat.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (5.56)-in reply-I thank the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) and the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) for their contributions to this debate. I simply take the honourable member for Adelaide back a little further-to 1975. The Bounty (Ships) Act at that time provided for either a vessel of 21 metres in length or a vessel of 150 gross construction tons. The 1980 Act, which replaced the 1975 Act, intended to carry that further but did not. I can assure the honourable member that, notwithstanding the way in which it is expressed, the effect of the amendment in clause 3 of the Bill which will amend section 3 of the principal Act is to ensure that fishing vessels over 150 gross construction tons but 21 metres or less in length are eligible for the bounty.
As a matter of interest, it has been put to me that it will be very difficult to get 150 tons gross into a vessel less than 21 metres in length, but if such vessels are created they will attract the bounty. Also, I say to the honourable member that fortuitously nobody suffered any damage as a result of what has occurred here. No vessels built in Australia have come within those brackets. I am very pleased to tell the honourable member that no vessels imported into Australia have come within those brackets. Therefore, the House should be indebted to the honourable member for Adelaide for having picked up this matter in 1980. He will be delighted to know that all is well that

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1479

ends well and that nobody is at fault in the Department of Industry and Commerce or, I would think,in the Attorney-General's Department.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
Sitting suspended from 5.58 to 8 p.m.
BOUNTY (BERRY FRUITS) BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrHodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (8.00)-The Opposition supports the Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill. We are very much in favour of the method of protection being proposed. The farm industries are very concerned that they cop a lot of abuse, sarcasm and comments because of the superphosphate bounty, now a superphosphate subsidy. It seems to be impressed in the mind of every person who lives in the city that somehow the farmers are making a fortune through such a thing as the superphosphate bounty. They are prepared to cop that because there is only one way of giving them some compensation for the heavy load of secondary industry protection that they bear in terms of their exports. I would like to talk more about that later because I think this Bill bears very directly on one of the ways in which we can move with respect to industry protection in general. There are tariffs, quotas, subsidies and bounties, and probably in this instance a bounty is by far the best way in which to help and to protect this industry. It is a rather small and a rather diverse industry. I am sure that honourable members are absolutely fascinated as I talk about strawberries, raspberries, currants and all these sorts of things. I think they are of interest to all honourable members.
I shall go through the Bill briefly. It provides assistance by way of a bounty to the berry fruits industry as announced in the Budget. The bounty is to be a payment to producers of $100 a tonne until 30 June 1987, that is, for five years. This action was recommended by the Industries Assistance Commission in its report on fruit and fruit products which came down in August 1981. The Government is always a little slow to act on these

things but it has acted reasonably quickly in this case. The growers and processors requested increased tariffs at the lAC hearings. Again, that is one way to help an industry. The bounty is equivalent to a 10 per cent duty. The Industries Assistance Commission considered that the imposition of a tariff would be of little benefit to the industry as it would increase the cost of locally produced jam and juice, the major processing outlets for berry fruits, and reduce the competitiveness of these industries against imports. Offsetting tariffs on jams and juice would only have added to the costs imposed on consumers. The lAC recommended that bounty be paid to processors, and the Bill proposes payment to producers providing the fruit is processed. This ensures that the benefits of the bounty are received directly by producers. It is out in the open, people now acknowledge who is paying for this assistance to industry, it is not disguised by a tariff, the industry needs assistance, and we all know where we are.
The fruits covered by this legislation are the berry fruits in general-strawberries, raspberries, loganberries, youngberries and gooseberries. Strawberries account for about 80 per cent of Australian berry production. The production of other fruits is declining except in some areas. The Tasmanians are trying to encourage the growth of berries because they feel that their climate and soils are particularly advantageous for this sort of production. Similarly, there is a big emphasis on the growing of berries in some parts of the electorate of Ballarat. Over 60 per cent of strawberries are grown in Victoria and Queensland and of the other fruits over 90 per cent are grown in Tasmania. There are only about 800 producers in the berry fruits industry. There are 550 strawberry growers and 250 berry fruit producers in Tasmania. The strawberry growers have been agitating for some time for assistance. The lAC in its recommendations-it is set out in the report, which is a rather big one-seems to focus on the berry fruit growers in Tasmania.
Of late I have been getting quite a deal of correspondence from the strawberry growers of Australia because they have been very concerned about imports. On behalf of the growers in Redlands, Nambour and Caboolture, in the electorate of the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann)-I expect, Mr Deputy Speaker, that you have had some requests from some of the growers in your electorate of Wide Bay-who have been concerned about the level of imports, I wrote to the right honourable member for

1480 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch) about the level of imports and the effect this was having on the industry. In sterling bureaucratese the answer came back that only about 41 tonnes is coming in and that, as we produce 10,000 tonnes a year, by and large it is not particularly significant for the local industry to cope with. The problem with getting these sorts of replies dealing in stale statistics and taking a rather neutral sort of academic approach is that the growers themselves never quite accept that what they are told is actually true. Even that level of imports can affect specific markets.
Growers in many of the horticultural industries point out that even if only a small proportion comes in it affects the top of the market. It takes off the top of the market. They are used to a situation in which the market goes up and down and they really rely on the peaks in the market to give them a maximum return to cope with the lower points in the market. With producers of any product that sell on the fresh market, whether it be potatoes, beans or whatever, whenever the imports come in, even if they represent only a very small proportion of the total production, they knock around their overall profitability. The allegations from the Cabooiture, Nambour and Redlands area was that soil was coming in on the Californian strawberries, that different standards were being applied by people in Australia to spoilage of the strawberries, and that there was a possibility of the medfly coming in. The Committee of Direction of Fruit Marketing, for example, was one organisation which, together with the strawberry producers, was concerned about the different standards applying, the level of imports, and the impact this was having on the market. The Australian Labor Party candidate for Fisher, Mr Theo, was quite assiduous in bringing this matter to my attention.
The honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren), when I was recently in his electorate, introduced me to some of the berry growers there. I have already referred to the fact that there are growers in parts of the Commonwealth, particularly in Tasmania and some parts of Victoria, who are trying to develop the industry. They were particularly concerned about the closer economic relations with New Zealand-CER-and I think it is a proper time to talk about the situation that they will face. New Zealand has a comparative advantage in berry fruit production. It is doing very well in the production of kiwi fruit. Its climate is particularly suited to the growing of kiwi fruit, or Chinese gooseberries as we use to call them before China turned red-it is a little paler these days; it is pink. New Zealand has a comparative advantage in the production of berry

fruits in general, just as it has a comparative advantage over Australia in timber production. It is logical to assume that, in terms of berries, some horticultural products and timber products, with the closer economic relations agreement with New Zealand probably being signed on 1 January next year, in the long haul these industries will be affected.
Berry fruit growers in Australia face a general trading problem that has nothing to do with CER. Berry fruits are already on schedule A of the New Zealand-Australia Free Trade Agreement. That is, there is essentially free trade for the fresh products, and New Zealand has an export incentive of about 10 per cent for processed fruit. CER offers one advantage to Australian producers in that they will have automatic access to dumping action if New Zealand imports pose a threat of injury. New Zealand berry fruit growers currently receive export incentives, but under CER these will be phased out between 1985 and 1987. There is a possibility that these incentives could go earlier. New Zealand's concern over the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade subsidies code could also result in the export incentives being abandoned. The New Zealand growers also received an export suspensory loan. Under the CER arrangement this will apply only to existing plantings. Australia wants this provision removed but the New Zealand argument is that the scheme is designed to encourage exports to western Europe and Japan and not to Australia. In summary what I am trying to say is that CER cannot make the position of berry fruit growers in Australia any less competitive against New Zealand. When New Zealand export incentives are phased out it may make the situation better. So the industry's fears about trade with New Zealand would exist even without CER.
There is little that can be done to assist the competitiveness of a basically uncompetitive industry. Again it makes more sense to do what the Government has done-give a bounty of $100 per tonne which will go to producers if the product is processed. The fresh markets will still be exposed but I think we can see that there is a lot of wisdom in what the Government is doing in this matter. It will give the growers a chance in the next five years to get direct subsidisation by a bounty which is, as I have said, out in the open. The Australian Labor Party's reaction to CER in this matter, as in many other areas, is that the timing of the phaseout of the export incentives from New Zealand is too protracted. Delays until 1987 are a bit long. We say also that New Zealand export suspensory loans should be phased out. I said just a moment ago that New Zealand says that those loans will

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1481

apply only to existing plantings but over the past two or three years plantings have increased substantially. Those loans are worth about $2m to blackcurrant growers in New Zealand and about $O.5m to other berry fruit growers. We need assurances, of course, that the anti-dumping provisions will work quickly and efficiently. The whole problem with CER from the Opposition's point of view and from the growers' point of view is that we are still not quite sure about how it will all work in practice. I guess there will be a fair element of 'suck it and see' from now on. It will be a
question of continuing negotiations. I think that is all that can be said about it. Some of the smaller industries will need ongoing industry panels. When one talks to Tasmanian vegetable growers-the people who grow beans, potatoes, peas and those sorts of things-one finds that they
really think that they will need continuous and continuing access to negotiations with New Zealand so that they can protect their industries. By and large people on both sides of the Tasman who are dairy producers or fruit or vegetable producers talk the same language but they simply want the assurance in this country that the Government will act in their interests and in Australia's interests and that they will not get
duded somewhere along the line because our negotiating techniques are not up to scratch or we are short of a few facts. The Australian Labor party supports that sort of process even to the extent that it may be necessary to give some formal support to the industry organisation so that it can maintain that negotiating position.
I started off by saying that the Opposition welcomes this approach to industry assistance. I think it is appropriate in this debate to raise some of the more general issues associated with industry assistance in Australia. Today in a matter of public importance we debated the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd and the problems that it has. I know and fully understand the reasons why no government in this situation could do much about tariffs, with half a million unemployed-that figure is growing-when most of the world is battening down the hatches, when even the Korean ship building and steel industry is in a bit

of trouble, and when we have world wide recession. It is very understandable and commendable for governments also to look after their own producers. The Government has taken a decision regarding BHP with which I disagree to some extent. Surely we understand some of the problems inherent in assisting industries at this time. What will happen with BHP closures in the Hunter Valley and in Wollongong, as I well know having represented part of that Wollongong area for a while, will be devastation. We all know of the real human problems when industries put off people at the level at which they are now putting them off. One thing we have to face, looking at the political pressures in this country with seven governments and the State governments dragging their coat tails to get industries, no matter how efficient in the long term, is that it is very difficult for any government to set about national policy making and methods of assistance to industries on a rational basis. The political costs are too high. The regional costs if protection is suddenly pulled out are quite devastating. If support is pulled away from the white goods industry and the car industry in South Australia, for example, there will be enormous social and political problems. The impact will be felt immediately. Whichever political party is in opposition will exploit the situation. To some extent the country is ungovernable on some of these longer term questions. A week is not a long time in politics. To get any government to think further than the next election is very difficult; I am sure that all honourable members accept that. I really think we need to look closely at some of the facts about protection and at some of the loads being borne by the efficient exporting sectors of the economy and take the facts on board to the extent that we can. Unless it is at the back of the minds of policy makers we will never get any progress at all. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard six tables which come from the Industries Assistance Commission, the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

1482 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

Table 1 PROTECTION, IMPORTS AND EMPLOYMENT, 1972-73 TO 1975-76

Average effective protection, 1972-73

Average effective protection, 1975-76

Increase in
share of market going
to imports 1972-73 to
1975-76

Change in employment,
1972-73 to 1975-76

%

%

%

%

Upper assistance group-

Those with significant increases in assistance 1972-73 to

1975-76

88

94

+5

-21

All upper assistance industries

73

57

+2

-10

Middle assistance group

39

33

+6

8

Lower assistance group

II

II

+5

-4

Source: lAC, Annual Report 1977-78, pp. 70-73.
Table 2 PROFITABILITY OF INDUSTRY GROUPS, 1974-75 TO 1978-79

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Upper assistance Middle assistance Lower assistance Manufacturing sector

13.1

14.5

14.9

15.2

16.1

13.3

14.4

13.3

13.2

14.6

10.1

10.4

11.2

10.1

14.7

12.1

13.1

13.4

12.7

15.1

Source: derived from lAC, Annual Report 1979-80, p. 186; Annual Report 1977-78, pp. 67-68; ABS, Manufacturing Establishments, Summary of Operations by Industry Class.

Table3
REAL LABOUR PRODUCTIVITY, ANNUAL CHANGE INDUSTRY GROUPINGS

Table 4
INCIDENCE OF TAX EFFECTS OF TARIFFS AND QUOTAS, 1977-78

1968-69
to 1972-73

1972-73
to 1975-76

Upper assistanceincreasing assistance all upper assistance
Middle assistance Lower assistance

3.7

7.7

3.1

4.8

0.8

2.6

2.2

2.8

Source: lAC, Annual Report 1977-78, pp. 69-70, ABS, Quarterly Estimates of National Income.

Income group

Proportion of households

Cost of tariffs
and quotas as a
proportion of household income

$p.w. 40 40-79 80-109 110-139 140-169 170-199
200-229 230-259 260-299 300-339 340-399 400 +

%

%

4.1

19.8

11.4

7.4

6.7

7.2

7.7

5.8

10.0

5.9

9.5

5.3

8.3

5.4

8.0

5.2

9.9

5.2

6.6

4.9

7.1

4.4

10.6

4.1

100.0

Source: lAC, Tariffs as Taxes, Canberra, lAC Information Paper No.2, 1980, p. 36.

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1483

TableS EFFECTIVE RATES OF ASSISTANCE AFFORDED SELECTED RURAL ACTIVITIES (%)
1970-80

Activity
Beef/Veal Mutton/Lamb Pigmeat Wool Wheat Sugar
Average major rural activities

19701971
2 3 -18 17 41 33
24

19711972
2 3 -19 25 43 10
22

19721973
2 0 -13 2 34 -5
9

19731974
2 0
*
2 -15 -20
4

19741975
5 4
*
3 -13 -31
2

19751976
4 4 19 2 -5 -23
5

19761977
3 3 -21 2 5 -15
5

19771978
13 I
-17 2 5
-13
8

19781979
4 0 17 1 -5 -7
4

19791980
I 1 -3 0 -5 -12

* Estimated to be greater than lOOper cent.
Source: Industries Assistance Commission.
Table 6 SHORT RUN EFFECT OF REMOVING PROTECTION TO MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY ON AVERAGE NET FARM INCOME

Industry

Average net farm

Effect of removing protection of net farm income
Percentage income(a) increases(b)

1979-80Sheep-only Beef-only Wheat Sheep-beef Average of above Average all agriculture
1981-82Sheep-only Beef-only Wheat Sheep-beef Average of above Average all agriculture

$ per year
15,510 18,776 40,911 32,641 28,012 26,053
16,760 4,860 49,270 14,700 24,210 23,400

13.176 12.718 14.208 13.021 13.374 11.400
13.176 12.718 14.208 13.021 13.374 11.400

$ per week
39.30 45.92 111.78 81.73 72.05 57.12
42.47 11.89 134.62 36.81 62.27 51.30

(a) For present purposes net farm income is defined as the return to operator and family labour, management and capital (full equity) as published by the BAE (0.
Kingma 'The financial performance of Australian farms' NAOC, January 1982). Strictly net farm income does not include the return to family labour. (b) the percentage change estimates are based on ORANI results presented in J. Quiggin and A. Stoeckel (1982)
'Protection, Income Distribution and the Rural Sector', BAE Working Paper.
SOURCE:BAE

Mr KERIN-I thank the House. Table 1, 'Protection, Imports and Employment, 1972-3 to 1975-76', shows that those groups receiving significant increases in assistance between 1972-73 to 1975-76 did not stop unemployment. In other words, the groups having an average effective rate of protection between 88 per cent and 94 per cent actually had a change in unemployment downwards of 21 per cent. If we look at 'all upper assistance industries'--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Chair is reluctant to interrupt the

honourable member but he is fast losing relevance to the Bill before the House. I invite him to maintain relevance.
Mr KERIN-Mr Deputy Speaker, might I debate that with you to some degree. What we are talking about here is a bounty and methods of assistance to an industry. I would like to point out that some of the levels of protection we give to industries in the manufacturing sector which have a direct bearing on primary industries simply do not work. I am trying to expand on that theme.

1484 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair heard the honourable member on that basis for some considerable time. I invite him to be a little more attentive and to link his remarks to the Bill before the House in more specific terms.
Mr KERIN-I will not go into any lengthy elucidation of the tables I have incorporated except to say that Table 2 shows that the levels of protection give more profitability to industry groups. Table 3 shows that the reason there is less employment is that the amount of investment increases and therfore that puts off people. Table 4 indicates the cost to consumers among various interest groups. Tables 5 and 6 simply show that the levels of protection to primary industry are indeed rather low; that the average level of protection to primary industry is about 2 per cent whereas the average level of protection to the manufacturing industry is about 24 per cent. Table 6 simply shows the cost of this manufacturing industry protection to the primary industries. Mr Deputy Speaker, given your ruling I will not proceed with the remarks I had intended to make. I simply say again, to reinforce what I said earlier, that the Opposition is very much in accord with what the Government is doing by way of giving assistance to this industry.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (8.18)-It is good to follow the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) in the debate tonight. He copped a bit of a caning today but he has fought back tonight in a constructive fashion offering alternatives and indicating that he supports the legislation before the House.
Mr Groom-He is learning.
Mr GOODLUCK-He is only young yet; he will learn as time goes on. I am happy to speak in support of the Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill. The purpose of the Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision to provide bounty assistance to the production in Australia of certain fresh berry fruits used for processing. I may duplicate what has already been said but I think I need to get it into Hansard to let everybody know exactly what the legislation is about. The Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) who is at the table understands.
The decision to adopt this form of assistance follows the Government's acceptance of a recommendation by the Industries Assistance Commission in its report of 24 August 1981 entitled 'Fruit and Fruit Products'. The report covered a wide range of miscellaneous fruit products, and fresh and processed passion fruit and berry fruits.

The Government's decision on that report was announced on 21 April 1982. The Government accepted the lAC view that assistance in the form of a bounty rather than a tariff would be more appropriate in this case. A tariff on imports would have the effect of increasing the cost of locally produced jam and juice products using imported berry fruit and would reduce the competitiveness of those jams and juices againt imports. Furthermore, a tariff was considered not to be an efficient means of assisting producers of berry fruits.
The Bill provides for the bounty to be payable at the rate of $100 per tonne of commercially cultivated fresh fruit provided to the processors of the fruit. The bounty is to be paid directly to the growers of the fruit, and bounty payments will be based on information provided in regular returns to be furnished by the processors. That is a very straight forward affair. The bounty is to enable producers to be more competitive and will help in trying new varieties. If we are to compete with New Zealand and provide the Australian market with fresh fruit such as strawberries and raspberries we need to be competitive and improve our varieties. This five year period of guaranteed protection will assist the growers.
A lot of people misunderstand the word 'marketing'. Some honourable members may be aware-I do not like to blow my trumpet at any time-that I taught marketing at the Hobart Technical College. In this House we hear the word 'marketing' bandied around. Marketing is the study of a product from its actual production right through to the consumer. It takes into consideration all the variations that occur, such as production, packaging, salesmanship and getting it on to the market. It is a continuous study. The honourable member for Werriwa will agree that it is the same with any other fruit we produce. We can produce the best fruit in the world but, unfortunately, sometimes we fail dismally in our attempts to get it on to the market. I am afraid that some of the growers in Australia consult people who have all the ideas about production, packaging and growing but, unfortunately, do not have many ideas about selling. Over the next five years this very important industry needs to be cultivated in order to perform better on all types of markets.
We will support this industry, and rightly so. The city dwellers of Australia love strawberries and raspberries; they are delicacies. If they are taken away they will miss them. As a consequence they would support this sort of legislation and would hope that the small producers are able to perform better so they get better strawberries and raspberries, et cetera. The situation is exactly the

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1485

same with respect to apples. We had the decline in the apple industry in Australia-in Tasmania specifically-and it was caused because of the very point which I make.
Sir James Killen-May I ask my friend--
Mr GOODLUCK-The honourable member is a gentle soul so he may ask me.
Sir James Killen-Why did the term 'apple isle' disappear?
Mr GOODLUCK-That is a very sad story and one I have spoken of on many occasions in this House. Experts-usually imported-came to Tasmania with all the degrees under the sun. They thought they knew all about marketing. Suddenly they diverted from the term 'apple isle' which was a marvellous hook as far as tourism was concerned. It was a marvellous hook for the people of Tasmania to be known as apple islanders. Unfortunately, they turned away from that term and Tasmania is now called 'holiday isle' or 'treasure isle'. That could mean any other island.
Mr Groom-Casino.
Mr GOODLUCK-Casino isle, indeed, yet Tasmania was known as the apple isle. Certain people took that title away from the State and I think it is very unfortunate. For most other fruits and fruit products covered by the Commission's report the scheme is to operate for a period of five years. Therefore it gives, in a meaningful way, support for five years. It will enable the fruit grower-I have mentioned this point-to plan ahead knowing that he will be given assistance during those crucial five years. The Government expects that the bounty scheme proposed by this Bill will assist the growers to adjust to newer technology and greater mechanisation so that they can withstand increasing competition from imports. The Government also expects that the assistance measure will ensure a greater uptake of locally produced berry fruits for processing.
I want to refer to another interesting point. I wrote to the manager of a very large airlinethere are only two; Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia. I do not think the manager would mind my mentioning this matter. While returning from Canberra last week on that early morning flight, which, as we all know is the only one we can get out on if we want to get back to our own States at an early time, I noted that the breakfast presented to me was accompanied by a small conserve. I am inquisitive and I looked at it. The label stated: 'Made in West Germany'.
Mr Donald Cameron-What?

Mr GOODLUCK-The label stated 'Made in West Germany'. I wrote to Ansett. I have the letter here. I have nothing against Ansett; my letter was very complimentary. This is the very point I was talking about-marketing. We allow our products to disappear. We do not package to meet a particular need and as a consequence we lose a lot of business on the airlines. Have honourable members been to many hotels? They should look at some of the conserves that are presented to them which are made in other countries.
Mr Donald Cameron-Read the letter.
Mr GOODLUCK-Are you interested in the letter?
Mr Donald Cameron-Yes.
Mr GOODLUCK-As I said, I have nothing against Ansett. My letter is very complimentary. It states:
General Manager, Ansett Airlines, 489 Swanston St., MELBOURNE,3ooo.
Dear Sir,
I am writing to you as a strong and long-term supporter of Ansett . . .
Nevertheless, there is one small matter about which in my role as a Federal Representative in Tasmania, I feel a certain amount of concern.
The delightfully presented breakfast trays on my Ansett flights include individual servings of jam. To my dismay, I noted that this product has been imported from Western Germany.
Tasmania-
Sorry to be parochial-
is noted for its berry fruits and its honey. Australia has many excellent producers of high quality conserves.
I find it quite alarming that, particularly in times of economic problems and high unemployment, our airlines, and indeed our major hotel chains also, are serving and promoting overseas produce.
I am therefore taking the step of drawing this matter to your attention with my personal recommendation that Australian conserves be served on Ansett flights to stimulate our own local industries.
I received an answer from Ansett. This matter is very relevant to the Bill; it concerns the whole point of the Bill, to let the fruit growers of Australia understand that if they can grow their fruit--
Mr Groom-They won't need a bounty.
Mr GOODLUCK-Right, they will not need a bounty in years to come. The letter from Ansett, in part, states:
I have been passed your letter dated 26th August concerning the use of imported jams on our breakfast flights.
As a general policy, we do prefer Australian products and our kitchens are currently buying local Kraft portion control jams. The enquiries prompted by your observation revealed

1486 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982

that the offending item is being placed on services from Canberra where we contract the catering.
The operator there has in good faith been supplying a West German 25 gram package believing it enhanced the tray setting. Nevertheless I have now arranged for an Australian brand to be substituted as soon as possible.
That is only a small point but all of us should adopt that sort of attitude towards developing our own products and be observant. If we know an Australian product can be substituted we will go a long way toward helping our primary producers. It is useless, with the greatest of respect, to come in here and talk year after year about this matter. We have to try a different angle. We have to try to improve the marketing of our dairy and fruit products. Then we will be more competitive, will be tuned to change and, I hope, sell many more of our products.
Honourable members on my side of the House have asked me to keep my speech brief. I should like to compliment the Minister on the presentation of his speech the other day and the assistance he has given me with my speech. It has been excellent. I would like to thank all concerned with this very good piece of legislation.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (8.29)-in reply-I thank the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerrin) and the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) for their valuable contributions to the debate. It is delightful to see the universal support accorded to this legislation. It is a first rate initiative on the part of the Government. My only sadness is that the right honourable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch), who really deserves the credit for this legislation, is not able, through illness, to be present with us this evening. There were two matters raised by the honourable member for Werriwa which I think require some reply, but the reply will be brief. He referred to the level of imports. I take all the points he made in what I concede from this side of the House was a well reasoned and balanced presentation.
I want to assure him that the Department of Industry and Commerce, in conjunction with the Department of Primary Industry-I was remiss in not referring to the work of the Minister for Primary industry (Mr Nixon) in also bringing the legislation to the Parliament-will very closely watch the level of imports. The granting of a bounty in itself is a positive public and open gesture by government that it wishes to assist an indigenous Australian industry. It stands to

reason, Mr Deputy Speaker-with your rural experience you will know this-that the level of assistance provided from government varies from time to time, depending on market demand and market factors. One of those factors is the level of imports. I assure the Opposition and the honourable member for Werriwa that the monitoring will be very carefully watched indeed.
In relation to closer economic relations, whilst noting the honourable member's point, I again remind him that one of the criteria upon which the closer economic relations are based is that there will be a mutuality of trust between Australia and New Zealand. On that basis I say with confidence that on an industry to industry negotiating level satisfactory arrangements will be made. I can assure the honourable member that members of the Government parties, particularly those representing electorates directly involved-I note the presence of the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom), who also has been very much involved in the bringing about of this legislatoinwill not see the throats of Australian producers cut by any initiative which is taken in haste and not after proper consideration. I remind the honourable member that in relation to processed berry fruit products the anti-dumping procedures exist and they will be utilised. I have the opportunity to make that comment because I happen to be directly involved in that part of the activity of the Deparment of Industry and Commerce.
To fail to compliment the honourable member for Franklin would be churlish. The honourable member has put a tremendous amount of work into the representations to government on this issue. Having represented the electorate of Huon from 1966 to 1974, I have to say that the small berry farmers of Tasmania have never had a greater champion than the honourable member for Franklin. I simply say that if all members of this House applied themselves as assiduously as he has to the cause of those small fruit and berry farmers the Parliament would be a much better parliament, and the country would be a much better country. I think we are very much in his debt. I commend the Bill to the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1487

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 14 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
, That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (8.34)-In the last few days the attention of this nation and of this Parliament has been solely directed to the matter of tax evasion in the community. Whilst that interest is proper, it is unfortunate that it has come at a time when it is distracting the nation's attention from the benefits contained in the 1982-83 Federal Budget. As we all realise, Budget night is a big night. People sit in this Parliament with hopes and expectations. The papers with which we are presented are numerous. They are volumes thick. Apart from the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and a handful of the Federal Ministry, there would be very few people in the Parliament who could be described as being very familiar with the contents of the Budget, whether they be good or bad.
In recent days, with my having to speak on the Budget in this Parliament, I have turned my attention to acquainting myself more closely with the contents. An area of interest to me is the portfolio of Social Security. As we all know that portfolio now encompasses both social security and housing matters. My electorate, which has more voters than any other electorate in Australia, is a growth area. Therefore, many people in my electorate with families and housing commitments are affected by this year's Budget. The office of the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) presented me with a number of letters from various organisations throughout the country. The letters were praiseworthy. They were from all over Australia, from various pensioner organisations, sheltered workshop groups, the National Council of Women of Australia, et cetera. All these letters had a common thread. They praised the Minister for the contents of the Budget. I have one letter from the Australian Pensioners League of Western Australia in which the general secretary said:
However, I am pleased to say that when I did refer to what was contained in the Budget being more than I had ever known at anyone time in my 21 years working with a pensioner organisation . .
She went on to say:
I am quite sincere in giving my personal comment that I do not recall any Budget which contained so many items for pensioners and for that I thank you and your colleagues for the consideration given.

That was enough to make me spend time on reading very closely what was contained in the Budget. I would say that in recent times-
Mr Campbell-She is a Liberal Party stooge.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-She is not a Liberal Party stooge. What a rotten, ungracious thing to say.
Mr Campbell-It is true.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-The honourable member may condemn but these comments come from everyone. If one listened to the speech by the leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) on the Tuesday night following the introduction of the Budget one would have thought that there was nothing in it for anybody. But when one gives attention to these things one realises that it is a Budget designed to assist a great section of our community that has made an input to this great country of ours.
I want to list some of the things and record them in this address to the Parliament this evening. I will refer only to the main features, although there are many other little features. The family allowance has gone up 50 per cent for the first and second children. The new family income supplement for low income earners other than pensioners and beneficiaries can be up to $10 a week per child. The private income level for pensioners is up from $20 to $30 a week for single pensioners and from $34.50 to $50 for couples. Pensioner health card benefit income limits are extended to $54 a week for single pensioners and to $90 for married pensioners. Fringe benefits are extended to all sickness beneficiaries. The unemployment benefit is increased. The income test for unemployment and sickness benefits is made more generous with a universal free area of $10 and there is an extended taper to $60 a week. Funds for child care services, apart from pre-schools, are increased by nearly 50 per cent under a rationalised and extended Children's Services Program. I could go on and on because there was just so much done in this Budget of a positive nature.
The only criticism I have of the Government in this Budget is that in my view it has not done enough to alert people to the fact that great benefits are available. In some cases people. will have to take steps to become eligible. The Government has an obligation to advise people so that they can make their own decisions on whether they have to initiate claims or certain actions to gain eligibility. It all boils down to this: In the 1981-82 Budget the expenditure on social security amounted to almost $10 billion. This year it has increased to $11,471m, which is an increase

1488 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

of 14 per cent. Any honourable member who follows me in the debate can make comments that are critical of some aspects of the Budget. That would be fair. It could be said: 'You have not done enough about this or that'. But probably during that speech there will also be the thread that the Government is taking too much from people by way of taxation. It is my view that we cannot have it both ways. Members of the Australian Labor Party cannot condemn aspects of the Budget and then, in the same speech, condemn the level of taxation.
I am putting aside for the purpose of this discussion the question of tax rip-offs. No one has been hotter in their pursuit this year than the honourable member for Fadden. All that aside, in a normal situation the obligation then falls on Opposition members to say where the money should not be spent. If the Opposition members are going to say that the money should not be spent in the areas of defence or aid to nongovernment schools, that is their prerogative and they are right. But they cannot come into the chamber and say: 'You should spend more money on this and that', and later say: 'We must reduce taxation'. I hope that personal tax will be lowered as the Treasurer's new legislation in respect of tax avoidance begins to bite. There is no escaping the fact that the Treasurer has been the greatest initiator of legislation to cut off tax evasion in this nation's history. Any fair man would have to acknowledge that. I hope that the Opposition acquired one or two fair men in Parliament at the last federal election who will admit that, although maybe that is hoping for too much.
I wish to refer also to the very important and precious area of housing. There has been hardly any publicity on or any comment about this area. There is no escaping the fact that the pressures on those who are buying and paying off their own homes have been caused to a very large degree by a shortage of money and the increase in interest rates. This has served to bring worries and concern to those people who are buying their own homes. Let it not be forgotten that no nation in the world does better than Australia when it comes to home ownership. Despite the difficulties and pressures, Australians still lead the world in terms of home ownership. So for all the condemnation-
Mr Milton-The proportion is dropping. It is slipping fast.
Mr Campbell-You sound like the honourable member for Franklin.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Fadden will ignore the interjections.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Opposition members hope that the proportion is slipping fast. They do nothing in this Parliament but talk down the economy, talk down people's hopes and aspirations and, in their imaginations, they create problems which cause worry in the community.
The point I want to make is that the Government has recognised in a most positive way the difficulties that many young couples raising a family are encountering in terms of the payments that they must make on their own homes. I believe it is only fair to congratulate the Government on the measures that have been introduced in recent months to alleviate the extra pressures which people have had to face. I will cite the position of a person who is buying a home and who has a loan of, say, $25,000 and an interest rate of 13-1: per cent. The home loan rebate will be worth about $263 in a full year or about $5 per week. Honourable members opposite may well say that $5 a week is nothing. But when one adds it to the extra social security benefits, increased family allowances, the changes in tax scales and all the things the Government has introduced, the final amount comes out at something like $21 per week. Then one has to subtract the extra costs that will be incurred as a result of some sales tax measures. There is a net gain of about $17 per week. Opposition members should not try to tell me that this has been a regressive Budget in terms of the interests of the people.
Let us take the case of a person who has not been fortunate enough to obtain a housing loan from a bank at an interest rate of 13-1: per cent, who has had to take out a second mortgage or who is in the situation of having to pay an interest rate of 17 per cent. The home loan rebate-I ask honourable members opposite to listen carefully-will be worth about $525 in a full year-the scheme starts in November-which represents about $10 per week. That will reduce the interest rate from an effective 17 per cent to 14.9 per cent. So the scheme works in such a way that approximately one-third of the interest over 10 per cent is subject to the rebate and money goes back into the pocket of the home buyer. The No. I objective in this nation is that we work to get interest rates down and to contain them at a lower level, but in view of the fact that these are with us at the moment-
Mr Campbell-What about the-
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I am not talking about dog houses. Stop barking at me. In view of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1489

the fact that we have interest rates at this level, I think it is a brilliant step by an initiating government to introduce a scheme which will bring a lot of relief to the hardships that many of these people undoubtedly were suffering. I congratulate the Government on that. In the remaining minutes available to me, I want to make some references to the subject which has preoccupied the nation in recent days. That is the question of tax evasion.
Mr Campbell-But they vote Liberal.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-The empty bells say that there is corruption in the Liberal Party. What garbage! If the members of the Labor Party could assure me that there is not one supporter in their party who has not been up to his armpits in it, their comments would be more meaningful. The Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union which provides money for Labor's election campaign has acted as the laundry. I am not going to say too much about it because I do not want to end up in the bottom of any harbour. That is the way it is. Honourable members opposite should not forget that that union is at the grass roots of their organisation. The painters and dockers pay fees to be affiliated with the Labor Party and contribute indirectly to Labor's election campaigns. Honourable members opposite cannot shake these people off even though the Leader of the Opposition has said: 'We must try to get rid of them because they are an embarrassment'. Let us put that aside. I did not want to be political in my comments on this subject but unfortunately this has been caused by interjections from the members of the Opposition. Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition in the debate on the censure motion of the Treasurer stated:
He-
That is the Treasurer--
is trying to diminish its significance by saying that it was worth only $300m to $350m as tax evasion. I guess that for the tax evasion industry that is small change but for the taxpayers of Australia it is an outrage.
The Leader of the Opposition has said that $300m to $350m is an outrage. I agree with him. I would say that $1 OOm being knocked off the system is an outrage. But I am also going to make this observation. One of the tragedies of the last decade is that we have seen what we might describe as morality and honesty in this country take a dive. The tax evasion which has been discovered in the Costigan report is symptomatic of a lot of what is going on in this country today.
Mr Milton-It all started on 11 November 1975.

Mr DONALD CAMERON-Please do not say that. I am trying to keep this debate on a higher plane than making comments like that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! If the honourable gentleman on my left persists in interjecting the Chair will have to deal with him.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-At the beginning of this year we saw the exposure of members of the medical profession, who were into the system up to their armpits. That does not mean that all doctors are bad, but many doctors were involved. The Australian Medical Association said that the amount of money involved was $100m. My view is that the amount involved was greater than $IOOm, and I have expressed that view in previous debates in this chamber. We saw a report the other day that three or four members of the Film Censorship Board have been charged with copying films in the Board's possession. The Public Service Board fined them $20 each. To me that is pathetic, but that is what happened. It is also symptomatic. I believe that, conservatively, $500m is being ripped out of the social security system.
I am endeavouring to say that there are so many areas of government administration in this country where people are into the system that it is about time we truly tightened up the system. Two types of stealing go on. There is no escaping the fact that it is stealing, whether people are dumping records at the bottom of the harbour or whether they are putting in false claims to the Social Security Department or other bodies. It is still the same thing. The only difference is that in one area people might be motivated by greed and in another area they might be motivated by need. That still does not make it right for any particular group to do it. Every time somebody dips into the system the Government has to dip deeper into the pockets of those in the work force to help finance the system. There is no use being angry in this House about the activities of one particular group without taking into consideration the activities of all groups.
I believe that now the Government has announced its determination to crack down further on those who are into the pockets of the. Australian taxpayers, it is time that it went right through the system. Even if it means the appointment of more public servants to administer departments and a better performance from departmental and regional heads to ensure the efficiency of those under them, it is something that has to be done. I return to my opening remarks. I hope that in the weeks ahead the Government undertakes

1490 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

measures to alert people to the provisions which have been introduced in the recent Budget to ensure that those who have eligibility do not miss out because of their ignorance of some of the benefits that have been granted. It gives me great pleasure to support this Budget. I remind the House that even the Leader of the Opposition has said that he will pass the votes. He knows it is a
good Budget
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MAHER (Lowe) (8.54)-In my first con-
tribution in this Parliament to a debate on a Federal Budget. I intend to debate the allocation of public moneys to the Attorney-General's Department and the Treasury. I have a personal knowledge of the working of both departments and have many friendships with a wide range of officers in each. From January 1960 for 10 years I was employed in the Commonwealth Attorney General's Department, first as a clerk at the High Court of Australia, and from 1963 to 1970 in the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Sydney. Soon after my admission to practice I was appointed to the Deputy Crown Solicitor's office as an acting senior legal officer with responsibility for supervising matters for the Australian Taxation Office, being mainly appeals to the High Court or boards of review.
It was with great sadness and a sense of desperation that I read the interim report No.4 written
by Mr Frank Costigan, Q.c., the Royal Com-
missioner of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. The report revealed in compelling prose the saga of events surrounding the failure to prosecute persons involved in a wide ranging tax evasion scheme now euphemistically known to all Australians as a bottom-of-the-harbour scheme. Regrettably, the first reaction to the Costigan report, both in this House and outside, was one of recrimination against the professional legal staff within the Attorney-General's Department. I have worked in the Federal Attorney-General's Department in Sydney and I have worked as a solicitor in private practice in the same city. I know that the legal staff giving advice to the Attorney General and the Treasurer are as highly qualified as anyone in private practice. I wish today to defend publicly these Public Service lawyers because they are known to me to be hard working and dedicated. By working with them. I appreciated the complexities of the legal matters they handled. They were underpaid when compared with solicitors in private practice. They have no opportunity to build up or develop the good will of a legal practice, nor may public servants

honestly take advantage of the normal taxation minimisation schemes common to the private legal profession.
From my personal knowledge of the Attorney General's Department and the Treasury I can say that I do not believe that prosecution of the operators of the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes could have been allowed to drag on in the Perth office uncompleted for eight years. The whole structure of the Crown Solicitor's office and the seven Deputy Crown Solicitors' offices follows normal Commonwealth Public Service procedures. Each
matter, each case, is thoroughly and exhaustively reported back to Central Office by each Deputy Crown Solicitor. This is the Commonwealth tradition and instructions flow to the Deputy Crown Solicitors' offices from Central Office. Welded on to this Public Service hierarchical structure is the
hallowed legal tradition of solicitor and client relationships. The Attorney-General is the Chief Law Officer of the Commonwealth. The Attorney-General's client is each Commonwealth Government department or instrumentality. Mr
Costigan, Q.c., however, dealt only with the re-
lationship vis-a-vis the Crown Solicitor's Office and the Australian Taxation Office. The client department gives instructions and it is given a report on progress. The client department receives a copy of each advising from counsel. The client, being the Commissioner of Taxation, was fully briefed on exactly what was happening in the Deputy Crown Solicitor's office in Perth. Every month a report would have been submitted by the Deputy Crown Solicitor in Perth to the Crown Solicitor in Canberra on the progress of this prosecution, yet the matter dragged on year in and year out. The Commissioner of Taxation in his annual reports to Parliament never disclosed or commented upon delays or difficulties experienced with the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office. No breach of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act would have been involved for the Commissioner of Taxation to report this scandalous state of affairs to Parliament. Yet he chose not to comment in even general terms upon bottom-of the-harbour schemes which have cost this nation $1,500m in taxation revenue.
Parliament is the highest court in the land. It is the cornerstone on which our democracy rests. Yet we have a government and a Treasurer who spend time chasing small taxpayers, pushing them into the appeal-clogged boards of review in each State, while at the same time no action is taken to reveal to Parliament the anarchy which exists in our tax collection system. Only by accident has this story, or part of it, been revealed in the reports of Costigan and McCabe-Lafranchi. One of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1491

the reasons why I left the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Sydney in 1970 was that I spent so much of my time in that office preparing monthly reports of all litigation. A lengthy written report had to be prepared on every case coming up for hearing and all reports were sent to the Crown Solicitor in Canberra. It was my experience that taxation matters were tightly supervised by the Taxation Office in Canberra. Usually, with an appeal to the High Court or to a board of review, the taxpayer through his solicitor would negotiate directly with the Commissioner of Taxation in Canberra. Instructions would be received by the Deputy Crown Solicitor to settle or not to settle. No request for advice on the terms of settlement was received nor was there a request for advice from counselor senior counsel. This was no matter how much money was involved in the settlement. Each taxation matter was supervised by the client in Canberra-that is the Commissioner of Taxation.
I believe that the appalling situation in the Perth Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office can be explained in ways other than incompetence. There is certainly no lack of supervision, no lack of reporting back. In the Attorney-General's Department we have history repeating itself. In March 1969 a young legal officer named Murray Sime employed in the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Sydney was elected as an evening student representative on the Sydney University Students Representative Council. This young man convened an anti-conscription rally. Unfortunately, the students council sent an invitation to the rally to the then Liberal Attorney-General, Nigel Bowen, Q.c.-now a Federal judge-inviting Mr Bowen to speak at the rally. The invitation was not drafted by the student. The phone number included in the invitation for the R.S.V.P. was that of the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Sydney, which happened to be the same number as that of the Commonwealth Attorney-General. Liberal Attorneys-General tend to have little sense of humour. Mr Sime was charged under section 55 of the Public Service Act. It was said that he was guilty of improper conduct. The issue caused great political embarrassment to Nigel Bowen. Subsequently, the legal officer's salary was reduced. He was told that he had no chance of promotion for 10 years. He considered an appeal but he resigned from the Commonwealth Public Service. Thereupon the disciplinary proceedings lapsed.
The legal officers in Perth have been charged under this same section-section 55 of the Public Service Act. This is the section used against public servants who come back to work after a liquid

lunch slightly under the weather. It is the section used against regular and persistent late-comers. In 1969 the Attorney-General of the day was a member of a Liberal Country Party administration running down and heading for electoral defeat several years later. In 1982 this Government is losing control and heading for electoral disaster either later this year or in 1983. Should any of the officers charged in Perth resign from the Public Service, proceedings against them would lapse and they would be no longer subject to the Public Service Act. These proceedings are not judicial proceedings. The whole exercise is very much a cosmetic one. The Australian people are witnessing an attempt to destroy partially the taxation system in our nation. In response they have perceived white collar anarchy. This Government responds by issuing petty charges under section 55 of the Public Service Act.
We have heard a lot about the Costigan report. We have heard a lot about tax evasion. But ultimately, the government of the day must take responsibility. It is this Government that has cut the number of staff in the Public Service. It is this Cabinet and this Liberal National Party Government which have destroyed the initiative of the Australian Public Service. In the legal departments great difficulties arose in 1978 when the Government launched the Greek conspiracy trials with 184 defendants. My friends in the Department told me of the impossible working conditions that they had to put up with. They were expected to carry an unhealthy load of cases. They could not possibly handle all the litigation, all the prosecutions coming into the Department at the very time when staff numbers were being cut. We all know now that these Greek conspiracy trials were a farce, that the evidence was fabricated. The tragedy of it is that the Government knew 18 months before it appeared in Australian papers that information by the chief Crown witness was false.
Mr Les Johnson-And it cost $7.5m.
Mr MAHER-Agreed. Let us compare the Government's action in the bottom-of-theharbour cases with its action against the New South Wales Government in its leverage leasing scheme with the Eraring power station. The New South Wales Government proposed to increase the supply of electricity in New South Wales by building the Eraring power station. It took advantage of the existing tax law to institute this scheme of leverage leasing. Out of the blue the Federal Treasurer (Mr Howard) acted overnight. In an eleventh hour announcement late at night he outlawed leverage leasing. The people who suffered were the New South Wales residents and

1492 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the people of Australia a~ a whole be~ause ~d equate supplies of electr~clty are essential. for industry if we are to get this country and this economy going again.

Yet, we have here a Government which for
eight years did nothing about bottom-of-theharbour schemes. The money lost in these schemes is a tragedy because most of it will never be recovered. Many of the beneficiaries-the original directors-are perhaps dead, overseas or are now impoverished or broke. They are possibly
speculators and much of this money will never be recovered. Along the way the commercial world will be littered with bankruptcies and insolvencies. This money could have been used partly to build the second airport in Sydney. It could have been used to wipe out our appalling number of
poor on the list of public housin~. It could have been used to improve our decrepit schools. I remind the House that I have invited the Minister for Education (Senator Peter Baume) to visit some of these appalling schools in my electorateboth state and Catholic schools. He has not ac-
cepted my invitation in on.e inst~nce: One ~chool in particular is a fire trap In which little children who do not speak English will be burnt to death one day. The Government is indifferent to these invitations. It is appalling.

Mr Donald Cameron-Is it a state school?

Mr MAHER-It is a Catholic school in my

electorate. The situation is appalling. There is no

fire escape. I have had a lot to say about it at

meetings in my electorate.. I invited the Mini~ter

in writing and by telegram In June to one meeting.

The money that has been taken from the pockets

of the Australian taxpayers by the bottom-of-the-

harbour experts could have been used to improve

our schools. It could have been used to build that

second airport so that we will not have a calamity

in Sydney, so that we will not have a aerol?l~ne

disaster with a plane coming down and killing

thousands of people. The Government has r~

sponsibility for aircraft. The Government w.Ill

have to pay every penny of the cost of the new air-

port. The Federal Government must build the air-

pGoovrt~rnnomt ethnet

New that

South has to

Wales pay for

Government. The the whole thing is

the Federal Government. It must pay for the sec-

ond airport. The Wran Government should not

contribute one penny to this new airport. I am de-

lighted to see that the honourable member for

Short land (Mr Morris) agrees with me

completely.

The other matters I wanted to touch on were some of the very weak statements in this Hou~e by the Treasurer in his so-called defence. He said to

this House this week that it was May 1978 before he learnt of the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. My son was born in May 1978. He is now at preschool learning to speak Italian as well as English. Four years have passed. It was only after the McCabe-Lafranchi and Costigan reports were revealed to this Parliament and to the nation that anything at all was done about thes~ bottom-of the-harbour schemes. Today, we receive these appalling letters from people up on the Gold Coast saying how evil it is to legislate, as one man say~, against 'artificial tax avoidance .schemes'. He IS one who is going to leave the Liberal Party. He has written to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Every member of parliament ~as sent these ridiculous letters from people saying that they were going to leave the Liberal Party. Really, it only encourages us to take th~ ma~ter ~urther. This gentleman from Grovedale In Vlctona has a total misconception. He calls them 'artificial taxation avoidance schemes'. There is nothing artificial about them. The tax is still owing. The tax was never paid. The tax debt against the original directors is still there. In just the same way as a criminal liability cannot be avoided-one cannot avoid criminal liability of a company by changing the company's name or the directors-one cannot avoid a tax liability. There is a whole sheaf of these letters which Mr Lynch, a chartered accountant, sent in. He says he is not involved. Heaven only knows why he has sent us all these letters.
Mr Donald Cameron-Has he sent them to you?
Mr MAHER-He sent them to every member of Parliament. These people all have objections to retrospectivity, as they call it, in respect to bottom-of-the-harbour schemes and tax gathering. There is nothing retrospective about t~is: This is money still owing to the Treasury. T~lls ~s t~e money that the Commissioner of TaxatIOn In .hls annual report to Parliament talks about as being owed. The figure is well up in the $9~Om level. at present. That is the amount involved In tax aVOidance. In this Budget that the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) talked so long about and eulogised over we are told that tax avoidance has been abolished and that is how the Government has balanced the Budget. The Budget has been balanced by saying, with a ~troke of the pen, that tax avoidance has been abolished. The Government will be very lucky to get much of this money in at all. It will stir up quit~ a ho~ nets' nest in trying to get any of the money In. ThiS is how the Budget has been balanced. The Budget has already blown out with the funding for drought relief. The Government has to help the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1493

country people. That is how bad the Budget is. It is a very shonky Budget, to use the words of one of my colleagues.
The other matter I want to touch on tonight concerns the visit to Australia by Dr Barry Spitz. I hope he comes. I do not want to keep anyone out of this country. I raised in this House the matter of issuing a visa to this American expert on tax avoidance to permit him to visit Australia to lecture in Perth-we know what happens in Perth; his lectures in the Western Australian tax haven will be crowded-in Sydney and Melbourne on tax avoidance. The invitation I received is to attend a day tax teach-in on tax avoidance. The invitation went to every person who is on the mailing list of the Law Book Company Ltd in Sydney. I receive copies of income tax cases. I am interested in income tax and taxation. I am sure this gentleman, Dr Barry Spitz, is quite an expert. But we have a Government that talks about closing tax loopholes and stamping out tax avoidance. On the very same day I received this invitation to a teach-in organised by Dr Barry Spitz and obviously promoted in conjunction with the Law Book Company Ltd-a very reputable firm. That is how sincere this Government is in relation to tax avoidance. The whole thing is a sham. The Government is not at all interested in tax avoidance.
Every newspaper, every pensioners' journal and returned services journal that we pick up has advertisements saying 'Minimise your tax'. The centenary issue of the Catholic Weekly last Sunday had an advertisement aimed at retired people saying 'Pay your right tax'. The word 'right' was in dark, italicised type. That means do not pay tax. This was advertised by an accountant whose business it is to advise people how to get out of paying tax. Good luck to them. That is a legitimate business. But we have here a Government that is telling us: 'We are going to stop taxation lurks; we are going to stop tax evasion and stop tax avoidance'. Those two words get all rolled up together in a very convoluted way. The Government is not sincere or genuine. It is its fault that the Public Service has run down and cannot function properly. Public servants have lost heart and enthusiasm and that is why tonight I have said a few words in support of the people in the Crown Solicitor's office who are hard working. They are overworked and underpaid. They are loyal public servants and they resent the remarks about them and the smear campaign run against them. It is the Government that gives instructions. It is not the lawyer who goes to goal, it is the client. In this case the client is the Liberal Party-National Country Party Government and the Treasurer.

He is the man and it is his Department that has the responsibility. It is not the Attorney-General's Department that has the responsibility. The whole thing was run from Canberra. The whole situation was neglected. The Government cannot blame some poor innocent Deputy Crown Solicitor in Perth. The Government must blame the Treasurer.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (9.14)-The Government's economic program is a responsive one and has met a number of real requests and pressures in the electorate which every honourable member would have experienced through his electorate office. I was pleased to measure some of the public reflection of this after the Budget was brought down in the visits of people to my office. People expressed thanks for having been helped in a good number of directions. I am pleased indeed to congratulate the Treasurer (Mr Howard) for recognising the representations that have been made to him by all honourable members on various apects of public need and the way in which he has met some of these needs as best he can within the limits of his budgetary programming.
There has been a great deal of discussion about tax evasion. I believe, as the Treasurer said on Tuesday, that there needs to be a perspective gained about this in the community, especially in regard to the Government's actions on tax evasion. The Treasurer has a formidable list of activities in attacking tax evasion in Australia. He has met with remarkable success and he has initiated legislation of a more severe nature than has ever before been presented to this Parliament to bring tax evaders to justice in this community. However, we now recognise that in parallel with his actions, so effective are those many directions, there developed over several years another area of departmental negligence which has meant that the community has been robbed of proper tax payments of some as yet unknown quantity. Quite frankly I do not believe the Opposition claims that this figure is something in the order of $15,OOOm.
Mr Mountford-How much is it?
Mr STEELE-HALL-The honourable member from the Australian Labor Party asks how much it is. I guess he is asking that question in his party room of his leader and his advisers. He does not know. It is quite irrelevant for him to state that the amount is $15,OOOm. We all know and agree that it is a significant amount, that such

1494 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

a loss ought not to have occurred and that the Government is setting about recovering the money that can be recovered.
Mr Dawkins-Who has got it at the moment?
Mr STEELE-HALL-The interjections from the Opposition are of course well intentioned. I remind Opposition members that it would be much better if they exhibited their own virtue to progress rather than to seize on some of the more nefarious acts of some other members of the community. Much of the deficiency rests in the long trail of confusing negligence in two departments. I am one who wholeheartedly supports Mr Costigan in his various reports on this matter. It is quite obvious that the judicial processes in this community are not sufficient, in their presently organised fashion, to reveal the extent of organised crime and fraud in the community. Obviously we need better machinery, which I hope in the end will come out in the form of a crimes commission, constantly to report on this sort of undesirable activity. In the meantime we owe a great debt, as a community, to Commissioner Costigan for revealing these defects. In no way do I try to invalidate his report simply because there are some mistakes in it. A report of that width and depth must inevitably contain errors. So long as those errors are not pivotal to his findings we must accept t.he corrections which he provides and go along with a search to fulfil the obligations which he presents to us.
I suppose there is one clear lesson from this: Had action been taken in time by the departments which are under severe criticism these large scale schemes would not have got off the ground. They would not have been planned. The Government would have been seen to be active in suppressing them and, of course, we would not be confronted with this very messy situation of considering retrospective legislation which will have some of the effects which are acknowledged on both sides of ~he House. I believe that further disciplinary actIOn must be taken. I do not believe that prosecuting three subordinate individuals in a department on the periphery in Perth is sufficient. If there is to be a deterrent to this occurring and recurring in government departments there must be sufficient action now to demonstrate penalties to those who will not comply with an accepted standard of administration. Therefore, I believe that departmental officers who are far further up the ladder should at least be shifted, admonished or disciplined. If what we have seen so far by way of prosecutions is to continue, we can expect no better response at any time in the future. If no ministerial responsibility is acceptable in this matter,

and if no departmental heads are to be dealt with

we will not see a required form of penalty.

'

I want to raise one particular point in consider-

ing this matter; that is, the very confused mixing

of the terms 'evasion' and 'avoidance'. I think this

is tremendously important to the general com-

munity. It has been considered widely that one

can legitimately take steps to avoid taxation, and

no end of people have done it, for instance, by the

well known method of taking out insurance poli-

cies. It is one of the most respectable forms,

encouraged by all governments so that institutions

in this community will aggregate great funds to in-

vest in our natural resources and so that individ-

uals in the community will have funds on which

they can retire more comfortably than would

otherwise be the case. It is undoubtedly a matter

of tax avoidance for many people and, as I have

said, would be one of the most respectable of all

m~~h?ds that could be adopted. I quite frankly

Criticise the Treasurer for mixing the two terms. I

noticed that in bringing in his Crimes (Taxation

Offences) Bill on 26 November 1980 he men-

tioned quite correctly, as reported at page 76 of

Hansard, his move against calculated and fraudu-

lent evasion of tax. On the next page he lapsed

when he referred to promoters of avoidance

schemes. Later in his speech he talked of evasion

practices.

We have a thorough mixing of terms which I believe is thoroughly confusing to people who might wonder where they are in this regard. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has continued to use the terms without qualification. I think this is something that needs to be cleared up so that the public know where it stands. I noticed that an honourable member opposite, when speaking tonight, used the term 'tax minimisation'. It might be that we are going to shift from the word 'evasion' to the word 'avoidance' and then shift from 'avoidance' to 'minimisation'. Of course, these are all technical terms but they mean a great deal to the community. I am sure that those people who are relying on insurance policies to provide for their retirement, on which policies they receive a tax deduction or rebate at the end of the year, are deeply concerned that retrospective legislation in future may declare that practice to be illegal. In fact I have received some notice of this concern in my office. That is a very clear indication of the need to be careful how one labels this practice.

Mr Dawkins-Is this the Steele Hall cheer squad? Four members of the cheer squad.

Mr Peacock-All you would ever get would be a sneer squad.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1495

Mr Dawkins-That is good, Andrew.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The House will come to order. The honourable member for Boothby will be heard without interruption.
Mr STEELE HALL-I was about to help the honourable member with some advice which I thought he might welcome. I believe that the Government must take a clearly perceived move which the public will recognise as a most serious and earnest endeavour to meet the problem which has now been revealed by Costigan. I believe we need to have appointed a Minister who will have nothing else to do until this question is thoroughly and successfully resolved but to see that the prosecutors, in whatever form they may operate, have sufficient authority and support and to see that the Government develops the right legislative backing for whatever is necessary to fulfil this program of remedial action. I believe there is one man who comes to mind. I do not want to offer gratuitous advice frequently, but I believe there is on the back bench of the Senate a member who would make an admirable Minister in charge of this sort of operation. I refer to Senator Withers, who has previously been a most successful Minister in the Fraser Government. He is a man of great experience. The reasons for his removal from the Ministry are, I believe, no longer valid in the current perception of ministerial responsibilities. He obviously is a tough-operating politician. As we know, he carries the nickname of the Toecutter, well deserved because of his formidable approach to the problems within his previous ministerial portfolios. His legal experience and the drive and personality which he possesses make him an admirable choice for such a position, which I recommend. I seriously ask the Government to take this matter to heart and to realise that we must link the foreshadowed action, and th~ action that has already been put into place in thIs House through the legislation to establish special prosecutors, to the public perception of it through a special, lone ministerial responsibility. I put forward the name of Senator Withers as an obvious candidate to fill that most important position.
One hopes that something of a constructive nature will come out of the denigration and rather difficult times which occur in this House over this subject. I hope the most positive thing that win come from it will be the formation of a crimes commission which will be of a standing nature and which will root out the evils of corruption, fraud and big crime in Australia by revealing what State organisations, State police forces and State Attorneys-General cannot or are frightened to do.

It is quite obvious that the system as we know it has failed, and it is basically a State system that has failed. It has taken the overall view of a man such as Commissioner Costigan, who regarded the national scene and who reached across State borders with the combined powers of a State government and the Commonwealth Government behind him to bring to our attention these practices which all of us have known vaguely have gone on but none have been able to quantify.
The Press has continually printed reports of crime in Australia. One only has to go through specially the weekend Press of the last several years to find continual reference to big crime. One can read learned text books on this matter and one can find any amount of explanations of what has been going on. But until we see it set out with the respectable backing of a royal commission none of us tends to take it seriously. It has been there before us. We as legislators have not recognised it. We need the prestige of a crimes commission to bring this to the constant notice of all governments in Australia. I hope that State governments will-collaborate and back the commission with their power to make records and premises available. I hope that they will give all the power that is. necessary to identify crime, to search.documents and to enable various State and Federal bodies to prosecute on the information gathered. The response from the States will test the sincerity of the State' governments and their ability to fight crime. On the record of some governments in Australia, one wonders whether they will muster that sincerity. The records of crime in New South Wales, which obviously reach deep into government, will indeed be a test for the New South Wales Government as to whether or not it will support a crimes commission.
Whether or not it does, I believe the Federal Government should press ahead regardless, after trying to get State support, and use the powers that it obviously has. They are much wider in many ways than we realise. In section 51 of the Commonwealth Constitution under such headings as .trade and commerce, taxation, postal, telegraphic and telephonic, defence, banking, bankruptcy, foreign corporations and so on, we find many powers which enable the Commonwealth to investigate pract.ices in the community. A crimes commission, even though it may have to start on the basis of having only Federal support, will be of immense use to the Australiim community in suppressing crime by revealing it in the first place. If it is reveah:d, how can State administrations fail to prosecute on well publicised information?
In the last few minutes of the time allotted to me, I wish. to refer to wages. The Treasurer made

1496 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

this one of the main points in his Budget Speech. On the third page, under the heading 'Economic Considerations', he said:
Further progress on this front-
He was referring to the wages front-
must be achieved if we are to become more competitive as a nation, thus reaping in full the benefits of a revival of the world economy when it comes.
For example, last year wage levels in this country grew by some 3 or 4 per cent more than the rate of inflation.
He went on to point out that this was completely out of step with our main trading partners and would lead to dire economic consequences in this country unless we came to grips with it. It seems to me that the Government's wages policy rests on an appeal to the unions to respond to the obvious advantages of lower taxation in the wage packet after 1 November. It is argued that the tax benefit will be in the order of $20 to $30 a week for the average weekly wage earner. That is a sizable advantage. The Government and the Treasurer can quite rightly ask for a response to that plea in terms of wage moderation. I fear, however, that that wage moderation will not be forthcoming. I talked recently to one of the captains of Australian industry. He replied quite bluntly to my question about whether he thought an appeal to the unions for wage moderation would work by saying that the only two things that worked in industrial relations were fear and greed. I hope that the situation is not as bad as that but I feel when I read of the circumstances of constant wage claims that the appeal will not be successful. It will not be successful unless we back our desire with some discipline.
Time does not permit me tonight to develop the consequences of a prices and incomes policy. I personally do not favour the bureaucratic fixing of prices or wages. I say, however, that it is not an ideological block to a capitalist society. One can well remember the prices and incomes policy of the Nixon Administration in the United States of America which one would not consider to have been a left wing government. There is argument about its success. There is considerable argument that it was successful in the shorter term. I believe that we should ask for wage moderation on the strength of discipline by saying to companies: 'If you are dependent on tariff and if you raise your wages in the next, say, six months while we are appealing for wage moderation on the basis of the considerable benefit of a tax return, you will lose that tariff protection'. Similarly, I believe that we should amend the Income Tax Assessment Act to make companies unable to claim as a tax expense increased wages paid to employees whilst we are asking for a wage pause. Unless we apply that sort

of discipline, our appeal for wage moderation will simply be unsuccessful.
Mr CROSS (Brisbane) (9.34)-Before I go on to the main thrust of my speech, I feel I should say something about the speeches that have preceded mine tonight. I wish to take up the matters raised by the honourable member for Lowe (Mr Maher) and the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) about the Crown Solicitor's Office and, indeed, the Public Service. This Government, from the very day on which it was elected, has carried on with what has been described by the Public Service unions as Public Service bashing. It has sought to reduce the strength of the Australian Public Service. As in every case where governments seek to intervene in matters such as this, in my experience over a considerable period as a former Commonwealth and State public ser-
vant, they do it very badly. They arrive at policies of not replacing the people who retire or die without any real capacity-certainly at State level; I cannot speak about the position in Canberra-to deploy the public servants most effectively.
I am not saying that there has not been some fat in some places in the Public Service. That sort of policy of not replacing people and allowing the work load to be distributed might be all right in one of the big departments of state but it works very badly in a small office such as the Crown Solicitor's Office or other small offices throughout the Service. Of course, there is a particular problem in fitting professional people into the Public Service. In some cases, where there is a specially structured organisation, such as the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, it works very well but generally in the Public Service we have many professional people locked into a system which is very much geared to the clerical work force. I do not believe that the Government has reason to take any satisfaction about the problems that have been shown up, because many of them are produced by its own policies. In recent times I have found the morale of the Australian Public Service to be very poor. Had the Public Service been operating effectively in some of these areas it would certainly have saved the revenue very significant amounts of money. One thinks about outdoor inquiry agents in the Department of Social Security, investigators in the Australian Taxation Office and the
like.
I wish also to take up what the honourable member for Boothby said about the establishment of a National Crimes Commission. I regret the lack of co-operation at this stage from the States. I do not believe that such a commission can be effective unless there is a degree of co-operation

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1497

between State and Commonwealth law enforcement agencies that we have not been able to bring about in this country. The State police forces regard the intrusion of the Australian Federal Police as unwarranted. They regard themselves as the people who have the experience on the ground. In many cases the level of entry into the police forces in recent years has been much below the level of entry into the Public Service. In the police forces many people who are very ill equipped to handle modern forms of crime are locked into a promotion system. Obviously, these matters have to be looked at from other than the point of view of each unit in the law enforcement area looking after its own vested interests. It seems to be that if law enforcement is to be effective it will involve a level of Commonwealth-State co-operation in a very sensitive and difficult area.
I wish to consider the Budget from a Queensland point of view. In doing so I will refer at times to the 1981 Budget Speech by the State Treasurer of Queensland, Dr Lew Edwards. He continually referred in last year's Budget Speech to financial relations between the Commonwealth and Queensland. I shall deal with some of the things he said then because they lay the basis for the situation that we have today in this Budget and in the forthcoming Queensland Budget which will be brought down on Thursday of next week. Dr Edwards in his Budget Speech last year mentioned a number of areas of unsatisfactory Commonwealth-State relations. One was the failure of the Commonwealth to accept for 1981-82 the new State relativities recommended by the Commonwealth Grants Commission. That cost Queensland $100m in the year just expired. Another was the decision to increase the States tax pool by only 9 per cent in a year when total Commonwealth receipts actually increased by 15.9 per cent while taxation revenue increased by 16.4 per cent. I have used Dr Edwards's statement and updated it with figures from our own Budget documents. Another unsatisfactory matter was the maintenance of the Loan Council allocations for 1981-82 at the same figure as in the previous year, reducing the program by not less than the inflation rate in the building industry. The Commonwealth, through the Loan Council, declined to approve infrastructure borrowing for newly submitted projects or for those for which formal approval had not been given, bringing about a shortfall of $197.5m in 1981-82.
Those criticisms were made in a year when State revenues were reasonably buoyant and when the position was far different from the present one. Let me outline the background against which Dr Edwards will bring down the

1982 Queensland Budget on Thursday week, 23 September. Let us consider the national scene: Inflation rising to 11 per cent; rising interest rates making life difficult for business at all levels, particularly small business; a sharp contraction in the home building industry; a decline in business investment; no growth in employment; and a massive rise in unemployment. Against that national background Queensland faces its own particular local problems which arise out of, firstly, its prosperity depending so much on primary industry and the mining industry; low export prices for sugar and beef; cut-backs in the export of coking coal; low world prices for copper and other nonferrous metals; the over-supply of bauxite on world markets; and reduced Commonwealth funding over the whole period of the Fraser Government for development of various things such as roads, irrigation and the like.
However, the most serious problem of all for the Queensland Government is the pressure that will be placed on all Queenslanders by this Budget through the reduced Commonwealth Government support for hospitals when the full impact of the 1981 Budget arrangements is felt this year. The year 1982 is the year of greatest threat to free public ward treatment in Queensland public hospitals. The Queensland Budget will show whether the Fraser Government will be successful in destroying free hospitals in Queensland or whether the Queensland Government will make such cut-backs in other areas, including health, education, welfare and the like, as will preserve the system. Queensland has the most efficient hospital system in Australia, in no small measure because the system is designed around the public ward component. The Queensland hospital system is quite distinct in that respect. Successive Queensland Labor Governments from 1915 to 1957 improved the efficiency of the system in medical and financial terms.
The year 1945 saw the introduction of free outpatient treatment in Queenland public hospitals. The year 1946 saw the introduction of free public ward treatment in Queenslandand throughout Australia with the Commonwealth paying a bed subsidy of $5 a day. That sounds quite unreal when one considers the change in money value since then, but that was the actual amount that was being charged for public ward treatment in Queensland at that time. In 1949 the Chifley Government raised that subsidy to seven shillings and six pence. The year 1949 saw the election of the Menzies Government and the commencement of the attempts by this Government-its successor-to destroy free hospitals in

1498 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

Queensland and throughout Australia. The distinctive difference between Queensland and the other States is that Queensland has had free hospitals established for a long period. It is a significant political issue in Queensland where people know from almost 40 years of experience the value to the people of the State of a free public ward system. At this stage I comment that when I talk about free public ward treatment I am not suggesting, as some people have suggested, that it is free. It is free only in the sense that people pay for it in their taxes throughout the year; they do not pay for it while they are sick. Everybody knows that.
I turn now to 1953. This was the year of the Liberal Government's health scheme, introduced under the aegis of Dr Earle Page. Under that scheme all Australians were to be forced to join private health and hospital insurance funds. They were forced to insure with a private organisation in order to obtain a government subsidy for their hospitalisation or health care through medical benefit societies. Part of that program was the withdrawal of the occupied bed subsidy. All but two of the States succumbed straight away to the introduction of that scheme. Queensland was the only State that held out because it had the Labor Government led by the late Honourable V. C. Gair. Queensland held out until the subsidy was restored, and it was continued without any increase until the end of the 1960s. I think Queensland owes a debt to the late Senator Neil O'Sullivan, who convinced the government of the day that for its political survival in Queensland it should restore the hospital bed subsidy.
In the whole of that Liberal-National Country Party government period from 1953 to 1972, a period of 19 years, the system discriminated against free public ward treatment, which continued only in Queensland. In 1972 the Australian Labor Party, on the countdown to its victory, had adopted the proposals of Drs Scotton and Deeble as the basis of what became Medibank when it was introduced in 1975. Prior to 1975-76 Queensland hospitals were assisted by the Commonwealth through the hospital bed subsidy, which by that time was $2 a day, pharmaceutical benefits for hospital patients and the recouped costs under the tuberculosis agreementassistance was of the order of $20m at that time. Queensland signed the Medibank agreement, to take effect from 1 September 1975, and the level of Commonwealth assistance dramatically increased to $103m in that first year. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which I have prepared showing expenditure from the Hospital Administration Trust Fund for the past 12 years.

Leave granted. The table read as follows-
QUEENSLAND HOSPITALS RECURRENT EXPENDITURE

Hospital

Admin-

Common-

istration

wealth

State

Year

Trust Fund contribution contribution

1971-72
1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78
1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 1981-82
1982-83

$ 79,348,834
94,748,459
116,254,395 162,748,989
216,161,094
270,472,858 302,644,201
341,076,979 388,313,390 471,916,939
533,676,000

$
15,677,695 17,774,193

$ 63,671,139 76,974,266

102,820,000 113,341,094 82,883,000 187,589,858 126,960,000 175,684,201
139,314,000 20I,762,979 152,912,000 235,401,390 179,541,000 292,375,939 165,155,000 368,521,000
92,970,000 (est.)

- Not available.
Mr CROSS-I thank the House. In 1981 this Commonwealth Government announced that it would not review the hospital cost sharing agreements after 30 June 1981 but would make identifiable grants to health programs in the States. In order to assist Queensland with its particular problem that year, a special grant of $16m was made. This Budget reduces assistance to Queensland hospitals by $72m this year. With increased costs, Queensland will need to find in excess of $140m to maintain free public ward treatment. I quote again from Dr Edwards's Budget Speech last year, in which he said:
The decision by the Commonwealth to end 50-50 cost sharing under the terms of the old Hospital Cost Sharing Agreement and to scale down its contribution to a cost sharing for disadvantaged patients only, has required the State to find additional funds of about $50 million this financial year.
The full impact of the Commonwealth's decision will become more apparent in 1982-83 when, on current estimates, the State will have to find in excess of $140 million of additional funds to maintain the hospital system.
The previous Cost Sharing Agreements, although I suggest not administered in the spirit in which they were entered into, did recognise that the cost of providing hospital and health care services placed a tremendous burden on State finances. The magnitude of the additional funding now required to be found in future years, at a time when growth in Commonwealth general revenue assistance is declining, will test the resiliance of State budgets in the years ahead.

Whereas the Commonwealth Government was previously
sharing costs of hospitals, and the Community Health and School Dental Services Programs on roughly a 50-50 basis with the State, for this and succeeding years the Common-
wealth will simply be providing a block grant of a size of their choosing and at a level much less than a 50-50 sharing of the cost of these services, with the block grant eventually being
written into the Tax Sharing grants. The Commonwealth's contribution this year-

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1499

He is referring to 1981-82-
will be $171 million compared with $183.5 million received for similar purposes in 1980-81, a decrease of$12.5 million or 6.8 per cent, which represents a shortfall of some $50 million on what we would have expected to receive had the previous arrangements and fee levels continued unchanged.
The impact of this unilateral Commonwealth decision on the State contribution to hospital and health care services is quite serious indeed. The State contribution necessary this year-
That is, 1981-82-
to maintain the State hospital system at a desirable standard is $281 million or $71 million more than last year's budgeted contribution of $21 0 million, an increase of 33.8 per cent. This is the position after allowing for the hospital fee increases effective from 1st September. Had the Commonwealth continued the hospital cost sharing arrangements with a revised fee structure, the State contribution towards the cost of its hospital system would have been about $245 million, an increase of some 16.5 per cent.
Last year the Queensland Government provided in its Budget an amount of $533,676,000 to the Hospital Administration Trust Fund for Queensland's public hospitals. The Commonwealth's contribution was $165,155,000, which means that the Queensland Government had to find $368,521,000 from its own revenue. This year the Commonwealth contribution is reduced by $72m. It means quite obviously that the Queensland Government will be obliged to find an amount conservatively estimated at $140m, and perhaps $150m, above its Budget provision last year. The Government has taken a further step in this Budget towards destroying the free hospital system in Queensland. Honourable members will no doubt remember the advertisements of th Liberal Party in Queensland in the election campaigns of 1969 and 1972. Posters were put on the telegraph and electricity poles around our general hospitals depicting blue scalpels dripping blood and the slogan 'Don't let Labor destroy Queensland's free hospitals'. Any fair-minded person, and any fair-minded Queenslander, must ask himself how much truth there was in the smear tactics in those days and where the responsibility for placing this enormous pressure on free public ward treatment on Queensland lies. It is particularly important to me as a Queenslander and it is important to all Australians. It is obvious that the Queensland free hospital system will continue under threat as long as Liberal-National Country Party governments rule in Canberra.
Mr Braithwaite-Rubbish!
Mr CROSS-The earnest hope of all Queenslanders is that the Queensland Government, on Thursday week, will make whatever sacrifices are necessary to retain the program. I understand the interjection was 'rubbish'. If the

honourable member for Dawson would care to read this speech in some detail I would be very happy to debate the matter with him at any appropriate place in his electorate so that Queenslanders might hear the truth of the story. The election of the Hayden Labor Government, later this year or next year, will remove the threat and restore the assistance, particularly important to Queensland but also important throughout Australia.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (9.52)-The 1982-83 Budget presented to the nation on 17 August from this House has been tested over the last few weeks. It has been, judging from the results in my electorate, very well received, although there have been one or two exceptions. There are other tests, and one is the comparison which one might draw between the Budget presented by our Treasurer (Mr Howard) containing what we felt were the Australian priorities and the alternatives offered by the Opposition. I think that is testimony in itself. I believe that the Opposition has been outwitted in connection with the Budget. In fact its only complaint lies in the fact that it is an election Budget. All the Opposition's complaints have been in that respect. In fact the Opposition has actually endorsed this Budget through its own fear of the Budget being the main instrument in an early election. I think that is what the Opposition fears more than anything else.
The Government's actions in making long overdue adjustments in the family allowance for the first and second child, in increasing substantially the spouse rebate, and in increasing the permissible earnings of pensioners for both pension and health card holders, while maintaining half yearly indexation are very welcome. These, with other benefits, will lift our welfare commitment from 28c in every dollar of government expenditure to 29c in every dollar. This upward trend presents us with a very unhealthy symptom that has deteriorated over the last 10 years and, unfortunately, continues on its downward trend. Also, adjustments to the Teriary Edueation Assistance Scheme and other areas of education mainly directed towards the independent schools are policies with which I fully concur. Our education system must retain the elements of competition and freedom of choice. Whilst the States maintain the public system and contribute only fractionally to the independent school system, it is imperative that funding from the Commonwealth should be used to redress the imbalance in favour of the independent system as part of our contract to education in Australia to maintain a balance to allow

1500 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

that choice for the parent and to ensure healthy competition.
What the state school compaigners do not acknowledge is that parents with children in an independent school will continue to pay the major portion of those school costs from their own pockets. I do not believe the costs should be wholly theirs, particularly because as taxpayers they continue to maintain the state system for other parents' children but not their own. The relief extended to taxpayers is again a measure I endorse. In the past governments have, for political and other reasons, continued to fund the welfare systems without bothering to check the health of the taxpayer. It has become quite apparent that the whole tax system is decidedly unhealthy at the moment. There have been many indications of this. Tax avoidance, the documented eidence of tax evasion, the decreasing number of taxpayers in the higher income bracket and their resultant decreased contribution to total revenue are all indicators of the poor state of health of our tax system. I welcome the reduction in the lower scale rate from 32c to 30c in the dollar. It should now be a priority objective of the Government to look at the other scales of 46c and 60c in the dollar and reduce them to 40c and SOc respetively. It has been clearly demonstrated that no person should be asked to share his pay cheque with the Government at a rate in excess of SOc in the dollar. I believe that most of the avoidance and some of the evasion will go out of our taxation system if these rates are reduced.
Mr Dawkins-You know that is nonsense.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-It is true, and the honourable member knows it. If he looks at the-
Mr Dawkins-Are you a flat tax nut?
Mr BRAITHWAITE-The honourable member ought to look at the statistics. Obviously he does not. Obviously he would not know.
Mr Dawkins-A flat tax nut.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-The honourable member is flat between the ears, that is all I can say. Whilst I also agree with increasing the zero taxation thresholds I believe that this tax free threshold should be available only to people on lower incomes and family earners and should be phased out as income increases. In fact I believe a major restructuring of our tax system can be achieved by gradually reducing this threshold for higher income earners and progressively reducing the top rates of tax to the 40c and SOc levels I mentioned earlier. We can no longer tinker with or touch up our income tax legislation. What is desparately needed and what this Budget does in

some small measure is a major restructuring to bring our taxation laws up to date so that we can better achieve the economic objectives of the 1980s and 1990s.
This Budget addresses itself to the aspect of tax evasion, a growth industry currently said to be running at the rate of 20 per cent of all declared incomes in Australia. According to a report of the Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd the underground economy is estimated at about $15 billion.
This means an annual loss of taxation of between $5 billion and $8 billion. That is a significant dip out of the total tax pool. The side of the coin which the Opposition, so often with feigned fury, debates is tax avoidance. I believe that the public should be given the complete tax avoidance story, and the story about the Australian Labor Party's guilt in this matter. If the honourable member opposite cares to listen, let him hear this: The present Government and its present Treasurer, have been blamed for not acting on tax avoidance which the Opposition claims to be worth a loss of
$7 billion to $8 billion. These figures are exaggerated according to the whim of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) or the member of the Opposition who makes the claim at any time. These are entirely misleading statements, and I dispute them. No one should be allowed to alter
facts for the sake of political expediency, as the Opposition is doing. Its statements must be disputed and I do so. The Leader of the Opposition should be asked first of all why he as Treasurer in 1975 and why Mr Crean and Mr Cairns as Treasurers in the Labor Governments between 1972 and 1975 did absolutely nothing about tax avoidance, and particularly the Curran scheme which was rife at the time. It was acknowledged by Mr Crean that there was tax avoidance in this area and yet Labor Treasurers did absolutely nothing about it. That is the question which the Leader of the Opposition and the members of the Opposition should be asked. Mr Crean, as I said, acknowledged it at the time. We also might ask why Mr Hayden did nothing to strengthen the anti-avoidance sections of the Income Tax Assessment Act under Labor. Nothing at all was done. Instead, Labor involved its total taxation efforts in removing benefits from the rural sector, restructuring tax rates to increase the overall collection of taxes and fiddling with a capital gains tax.
Mr Dawkins-You know better than that.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-The honourable member knows it is true. On these two questions alone, the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition itself must be found guilty in the first degree. Let us look at this Treasurer's record. No

Adjournment

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1501

Treasurer has done more than this Treasurer to bring the tax avoidance industry to an end, and he has done it very successfully. Labor Treasurers did nothing, but this Treasurer has, through many changes over four years, been significantly successful in this regard. The Costigan report does not probe the entire depth of the tax avoidance industry. Indeed, it could not; it was not set up for that. Yet it makes many assumptions. In a separate unpublished report taxpayers are named, obviously being people-
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Drought-Computerised Legal Information Retrieval Systems-Illegal Immigrants-Small
Businesses-Institute of Early Childhood Development-Tax Evasion Statistics
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m. I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (10.1)- Much has been said recently about the current and future effects upon primary producers and rural communities of the disastrous drought afflicting this country. Both State and Federal governments have announced programs to assist primary producers. It is the extent of the effects of the drought that are not fully understood by most people. Only recently I received a letter from Mr R. F. Mackay who is manager of Field Air (Ballarat) Pty Ltd. Mr Mackay has already written a letter to the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) in which he outlined the plight of the aerial agricultural industry.
In order to give some perspective to the problem confronted by this drought stricken industry I say that the income expected by Field Air for the period I July 1982 to 30 September 1982 will be only five per cent of that expected in a normal season. Incredible as it might seem, the area of cereal crops sprayed by the company has dropped from 80,000 hectares to 102 hectares. Mr Mackay states that there is no likelihood of any further work this month. Seven employees have been put off as a direct result of the drought. In a firm of this size that is a very serious matter indeed. This is a very important service industry to agriculture and one which cannot maintain itself outside its role in the agricultural process.
I raise this matter because of the complex network of industries and businesses that are already affected by the drought as it tightens its grip. Field Air has requested the Minister to recognise the unique situation of this industry in the face of the catastrophic collapse of demand for its services.

In its submission to the Minister, Field Air suggests that the Government agree to a moratorium on air navigation charges as they relate to agricultural aircraft. Because of the virtual standstill in this industry which is so vital to the welfare of a number of primary industries it is to be hoped that the Minister agrees. If some assistance is not forthcoming the prolonged drought will see the collapse of many of these aerial agricultural firms. I suggest that they have a special case, a suggestion which members on both sides of the House will surely support.
Mr Fisher-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I remind the honourable member for Ballarat that the Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia did its best to stop aviation fuel supplies going to these companies.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! There is no point of order.
Mr MILDREN-As I suggested, it is to be hoped that members on both sides of the Housebut it does not appear that we will have bipartisan support-will support the granting of this reasonable request so that experienced operators are able to remain in the industry. So often when we are faced with a disaster such as drought our attention is focused upon the farming community alone. As others have only recently reminded us, the network of those afflicted by the effects of drought is very complex indeed. In a city such as Ballarat the immediate effects will not be felt as dramatically as they will be in smaller country towns. Nevertheless, the impact will be there. Not only will less money flow from the farming community to city business houses, farm plant suppliers and so on but also market prices will be depressed and the quality of stock will be reduced.
In rural towns the effects are far more serious. Each and every business will be hit because famrers will receive no significant income this year. Engineering plants, farm machinery manufacturers and suppliers will be left without orders and holding stocks. Each of these matters deserves consideration but the aerial agricultural industry, which survives only if farm production is maintained at a reasonable level of activity, will collapse under severe drought conditions without government assistance of this very moderate kind.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (10.4)-1 have spoken several times in this House on the subject of computerised legal information retrieval systems. The last such speech I made was on 19 August this year. In that speech I warned of the implications of legislation introduced by the Victorian Government to amend the Council of Law Reporting in Victoria Act. Since then, the Council

1502 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Adjournment

of Law Reporting in Victoria, using its existing powers, has prohibited CCH Australia Ltd, a well-known legal publisher specialising in up to date loose-leaf publications, from publishing cases for up to six months after they are decided. Not only does this prohibition include decisions concerned with Victorian jurisdiction but also it purports to include cases concerned with Federal jurisdiction, such as tax cases heard in Victorian courts and cases concerned with legislation enacted uniformly by the Commonwealth and the States, such as cases on the new Companies Act. As I said to the House on 17 November 1981:
Every person is presumed to know the law and this indeed is his duty. Such an onerous duty must surely carry with it the right of unimpeded access to primary sources of the laws.
I am not alone in this view. The Committee on Copyright and Law in the United Kingdom, the Whitford Committee, observed:
The statutes and judgements, embodying as they do the law, should, on the face of it, be free of any possible copyright restrictions.
Sir Laurence Street, the Chief Justice of New South Wales, in his judgment in the case of Greciun-King on I October 1981, said:
In a free and democratic society the law and all its documentation, both statutory and interpretive, that is to say both in Acts of parliament and in judgements, must be 'publici juris'-available to all to be studied, to be used and to be quoted as a matter of public entitlement.
Yet this is not the position in Australia. In the United States of America all laws-that is, all statutes, regulations, cases and tribunal decisions -are in the public domain and can be freely reproduced by anybody. This has not resulted, as is suggested by certain bureaucrats, in a multitude of series of case reports of dubious accuracy. Instead of chaos, the United States legal profession and public are served by very comprehensive, accurate and up to date services ranging from traditional textbooks and case reports to specialised loose-leaf services, digests, indexes and computer data bases. In Australia, however, the Commonwealth and State governments claim that they have a Crown prerogative to publish exclusively cases, statutes and regulations. That this doctrine, with its roots dating back to Tudor times, can still be applied today to restrict basic civil rights in a modern democracy is incredible.
Even though deregulation of Crown copyright in statutes, regulations and cases was advocated by the razor gang report, nothing has yet been done in Australia. What possible arguments are there for retaining Crown copyright? It appears that there are three: Firstly, to ensure accuracy in documents purporting to the cases, statutes or regulations; secondly, to protect the financial

interests of government printers and the publishers of official case reports; and thirdly, to stop a proliferation of case reports. In Australia it appears that these arguments imply government controlled monopolies and almost total prohibition on other publications. In the United States market forces ensure accuracy because sales will fall off if a publication is persistently innaccurate.
In the United Kingdom the Government freely licenses its Crown copyright and will only retract its licence if there are abuses-presumably persistent inaccuracy. In the United States, government printers and publishers of official reports are not protected, they compete. In Britain the Government Printer and the official reports are protected by rules of court requiring that the official copy printed by the Government Printer of a statute or the official report of a case be quoted in court, if it is available, in precedence to other series. In neither Britain nor the United States are there restrictions on specialist series of case reports that deal with cases on a specific subject such as tax, corporate law, criminal law, family law, credit legislation and so on. These series often report a few cases from each jurisdiction and often report cases that are not considered worth reporting in the official reports. It cannot be sensibly argued that a specialist series of case reports is, ipso facto, undesirable, or that it is likely to affect in any way the official reports.
I urge, once again, the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) and the Government to make known the Government's policy on the deregulation of Crown copyright in statutes, cases and regulations and to throw open the Government's copyright laws in an unfettered way, as has been done in America, or else to grant licences freely to all parties seeking them, as is done in Britain. I also urge the Attorney-General to take all steps necessary to ensure that no State hinders the publication of any case of Federal jurisdiction or of national interest.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (1O.9)-The issue I want to raise tonight concerns the pronouncements of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) in relation to illegal immigrants. I want to draw the attention of the House to an editorial which appeared in II Globo, the major Italian newspaper in this country and one which, for a considerable period of time, has supported the conservative parties, although it seems to be changing its strategy somewhat recently. The heading of that editorial is 'Mr Minister, now don't exaggerate in this hunt for illegal immigrants (they are not taking bread out of Australian mouths)'. The editorial states:

Adjournment

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1503

The Federal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has distributed a communication to illustrate the launching of a more determined campaign against illegal immigrants (no-one knows whether there are 50 or 100,(00). The tone of the announcement attributed to the usually affable and jovial Minister Hodges is truculent and demagogic, in some respects bordering on the ridiculous.
The communication emits an excess of zeal which seems to indicate an intention to divert attention of public opinion from the grave economic problems of the times making 'migrants' the eternal scapegoats.
They are threatening an intensification of investigatures and judicial activity in confronting illegal immigrants. Employers of labour are being invited to collaborate with the authorities in order to uncover the culprits.
Lastly, there is a promise that with the expUlsion from the nation of the illegal workers, 40,000 new jobs will become available for the many unemployed Australians.
The operation is assuming a disturbing aspect of a . . . (witch-hunt). It is true that the law must be respected and the culprits punished, but it is also equally true that laws are made for men and not vice versa. Indulgence and flexibility in confronting culprits . . . are not only Christian virtues, but also characteristics of true democracy.
The hypothesis that 40,000 jobs currently occupied by illegal immigrants would automatically pass to registered unemployed is far from proven. The experience of a section of the Australian workforce of migrant communities . . . is that the illegal immigrants accept most frequently the heaviest and worst work-work that no Australian would accept.
Adequate organs of constitutional authority scrupulously exert their control over who arrives, leaves or remains in Australia . . . and an invitation to pack the bags of those who, for one motive or another have overstayed the expiry of their residence are undoubtedly legitimate. There is no need for the drama of arrest in the middle of the night, searches for identity documents which, thank God, no-one in this country is forced to carry. There is no need to develop an atmosphere of alarm and suspicion.
In the last analysis, if 40,000 illegal immigrants succeed in holding down a job despite half a million unemployed they must have some merit, some ability, some particular usefulness.
I want to add my personal concern to the concerns stated in that editorial. It is clear that we do not want illegal immigrants to be taking jobs away from Australians. Certain techniques have been suggested by the Minister, namely, the use of unions and the use of employers. One suggestion that has been put forward is that every Australian carry a card saying: 'I am eligible for work', or: 'I am eligible as a citizen to be employed'. I hope we have not come to that particular point in this country. The use of the suggestion that employers be used is extremely dangerous because it means that employers are able to intimidate all migrants, whether legal or illegal, by threatening to expose them to the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. Many legitimate migrants may not be aware of their rights. If the Government is serious

about cracking down on illegal immigrants working it should increase the resources of the Department in relation to this matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (10.14)-1 want to make some comments tonight in connection with small business, first of all, specifically to acknowledge what this Government has done within this year's Budget and previously to assist small business. It has increased the retention allowance for trading or business income to 80 per cent. When this Government came to office it was 50 per cent. It has also released from secondary taxation the first $1,000 of company dividends. I believe these measures have been very welcome. Small businesses outside the private company area have been allowed to self-superannuate and claim a deduction at the standard rate of the personal taxation, which rate has been reduced from 32c to 30c in the dollar. Employment schemes directed to training of the unemployed youth and the investment allowance too have been very welcome. I am sure they will be of great assistance.
In a very truncated speech in the grievance debate last Thursday I mentioned one of the difficulties in an area which is very vital to small business, that is, the tourist industry, and the effect of the elimination of the diesel excise rebate on the cost structure of some companies. I want to go on to mention two other difficulties that have been a set-back for the tourist industry, particularly the tourist vessel industry. Firstly, the 40 per cent investment allowance was retrospectively allowed for tourist buses but not vessels. Secondly, a 17-1per cent sales tax was imposed last year on new vessels used in the tourist trade. The Treasury said at that time that that was to correct an anomaly but all it did was create a further and larger anomaly for tourist vessel operators when compared with other operators in the tourist industry. These tourist vessel owners have certainly copped the brunt of the three measures which I have mentioned. Those who had vessels already under construction when the sales tax was applied, became liable for the tax because it was, in fact, retrospectively applied. On the one hand the investment allowance benefits were retrospectively denied and, on the other hand, the sales tax imposition was retrospectively applied. Both measures have penalised the industry.
If the Department of Industry and Commerce is to do its job properly it should move immediately to give relief to all small business enterprises

1504 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Adjournment

by clearing up the present diesel fuel rebate system and looking at the other anomalies I have mentioned. Small business often misses out on relief given to other industries which they serve. For instance, primary industries have available tax averaging and income equalisation deposits. While tax averaging may not be so effective for businesses serving the main industries, these businesses, in fact, suffer the same fluctuations of income as do the primary industries. I suggest that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) should look very carefully at extending both these measures, particularly the income equalisation deposits to small business in the towns that principally serve primary industries. This type of relief would be welcomed by businesses in some of the towns in Dawson which are feeling the pains of the recession in the sugar, rice and beef industries under the effect of world prices, the drought and high costs. The same access to long term finance at reasonable rates of interest would also be welcome and would be very equitable for small businsses.
For many years the taxation provisions contained special concessional company rates of tax for private companies. As far as I am aware, cooperative associations still receive this type of benefit on the initial amount of income. I believe that the same concession should be available to private companies because private company structures, above most other forms of business, suffer from lack of adequate finance to provide the necessary capital to maintain current assets such as stocks and debtors, to provide capital for fixed assets and to provide for the redemption of and interest on those loans. Liquidity lost through the withdrawal of a wider benefit for indexed stocks should be returned to the smaller struggling private companies in concessional tax rates. This, with the extension of the retention allowance and the personal tax exemptions on the first $1,000 of dividend income, would assist these companies in meeting their financial commitments in an inflationary period.
The whole tariff and protection policies of Australia are geared to assist big business of Australia often at the expense of small business. Protection, as I have often stated in this House, means additional wage demands by unions on those companies protected, it means lack of efficiency and tardiness to adopt new technology, and no attempt is made to reconstruct and adjust those companies. Small businesses pay more for the cost of their products, pay the follow-on effect of pay increases and, in the long run, go out of business as victims of the protected large

companies, often falling into their hands. A reduction in protection and its multiple costs to small businesses should be a more definite policy of the Government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (10.19)-ln the Age this morning the editorial was headed 'Merging colleges win a Federal reprieve'. I was interested to learn from it that the Federal Government has now decided to fund the Institute of Early Childhood Development up until the end of the year. The Institute is one of those colleges that the razor gang decided had to amalgamate. It never did tell us why. I have spoken on this topic in the House on three or four previous occasions. I make no apology for speaking on it again. I once again urge the Minister for Education (Senator Peter Baume) to think very carefully before he goes ahead with this plan. He has given a few more months reprieve in which he can rethink the whole idea and leave the Institute of Early Childhood Development where it is. I believe the whole future of the early childhood development field in Australia is at stake when an institute such as the Institute of Early Childhood Development, the only one of its kind in Victoria or, for that matter, in Australia, is asked to amalgamate with some other institute. The proposal is totally irrational. The amalgamations of other colleges have not been economically beneficial, yet the Federal Government maintains that to change the nation's only specialist institute that deals exclusively and effectively with the educational care and development of young children and to blend it with some other college of advanced education will be of some financial gain. We have never had any figures to prove this. We have never had a costing. We are just expected to accept the Minister's word.
More importantly, the research, community programs and training courses offered by the Institute will necessarily deteriorate as a result of the amalgamation. I am genuinely concerned that both the training and the services for Australian children will suffer as a result of the Government's threat both to education and to child care specifically. Australia should be willing to learn from the experience of overseas amalgamations. The warning we got from the disappearance of specialist early childhood colleges and institutes in Great Britain, due to amalgamations and cutbacks, should be heeded by this Government. They have resulted in Britain in a loss of quality in

Adjournment

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1505

early childhood courses now offered for the preparation of personnel to work in the early childhood fields. There is no one left to train the trainers who in turn will train the early childhood teachers of tomorrow. That expertise is not being passed down and the knowledge and experience built up over the years is being lost.
Australia has only one specialist centre for early childhood studies. It represents over 60 years of work by the community to have fostered its development to its present standard. It serves not only Australia but also South East Asia and the South Pacific region. We in Australia are regarded as an acknowledged leader in the provision of early childhood education and services. An integral part of this provision is the professional preparation of the Institute of Early Childhood Development of the special staff required to meet the needs of the early childhood field. The Institute has national and international responsibilities with its acceptance of students from the other Australian States and abroad. The Institute of Early Childhood Development is recognised throughout the world as a centre of excellence in the quality of its graduates and its capacity to undertake special studies related to early childhood development. I urge the Minister and the Government again-I have urged the Minister three times in the House and about half a dozen times by letter-to reverse the decision for the Institute of Early Childhood Development to amalgamate. If this is not done we will probably have to re-establish and rebuild the Institute in years to come. This will prove, as it is proving in Britain, to be a difficult and costly exercise. Specialists with an early childhood orientation, once dispersed, are not easily brought together again. Australia should not waste the resources it has taken 60 years to build.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.24)-Tonight I draw the attention of the House to the rough use of statistics by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in yesterday's censure motion.
Mr Dawkins-You would know all about that.
Mr BAUME-Yes, I would know about that. I know just how dishonest the Leader of the honourable member's party is in dealing with statistics on tax evasion and avoidance in this nation.
Mr Dawkins-You would be an expert on that. How many schemes did you organise?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent or the Chair will be obliged to deal with him. I call the honourable member for Macarthur.

Mr BAUME-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek a withdrawal of that normal personal abuse I expect from that creature opposite.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Dawkins-I am not going to withdraw anything to you. You're scum.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle-
Mr Dawkins-I am not going to withdraw anything.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw. The earlier expression escaped the Chair, due to the fact that both honourable members and the Chair were speaking at the same time.
Mr Dawkins-All I asked was how many schemes he organised.
Mr BAUME-It was not all the honourable member said.
Mr Dawkins-It was so.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will withdraw the expression that was heard by the Chair.
Mr Dawkins-Which one?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member knows full well.
Mr Dawkins-I said: 'How many schemes did you organise?'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The hearing of the Chair could be in error, but I think it was a very serious reflection.
Mr Dawkins-It was not. I said: 'How many schemes did you organise?'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I suggest that the honourable member for Fremantle will resolve this impasse if he simply withdraws.
Mr Dawkins-For your sake, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Macarthur.
Mr BAUME-I seek an unqualified withdrawal of the word 'scum'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Macarthur identifies the word of which the Chair sought withdrawal by the honourable member for Fremantle. I think the qualification that the honourable member for Fremantle attached to the withdrawal scarcely warrants the persistence of the honourable member for Macarthur, but if he persists the Chair must require the honourable member for Fremantle to withdraw without qualification.

1506 REPRESENTATIVES 15 September 1982

Adjournment

Mr BAUME-I insist.
Mr Dawkins-Again, for your sake, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Macarthur.
Mr BAUME-I am accustomed to that kind of personal abuse by way of interjection from the honourable member opposite because he has no coherent answer to the points of the fact I am presenting to this House. These points of fact are continually opposed in this House by that honourable member in that style. I refer to the allegations raised by the Treasurer yesterday when he said that there was $IO,OOOm to $15,000m in deprived revenue through tax evasion alone in this country.
Mr Coleman-A former Labor Treasurer.
Mr BAUME-That, coming from a former Labor Treasurer, is incredible. It makes one understand very clearly why the economy of this nation collapsed under that Treasurer. It is patently dishonest to say that $lO,OOOm to $15,000m has been forgone in tax revenue through tax evasion alone. The Leader of the Opposition quoted Mr Eric Risstrom of the Australian Taxpayers Association in an attempt to justify that figure. That is arrant nonsense. I took the trouble to speak to Mr Eric Risstrom today on this very topic, particularly following the nonsensical allegations that the former Labor Treasurer repeated on Nationwide last night. He alleged, on the basis of Mr Eric Risstrom's figures, that the average householder has been paying an extra $35 a week in tax to subsidise the failure to act sooner against the bottom-of-the-harbour transactions.
Mr Dawkins-People like you.
Mr BAUME-That is a lie.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Macarthur will withdraw.
Mr BAUME-I withdraw. I was simply emulating the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) who has adopted that phrase as a normal course of behaviour in this House. The bulk of Mr Risstrom's figure, which was $7,000m some years ago, related to the cash economy-the blue collar tax evasion practised by members of the party opposite. It is practised by members of the Labor Party far more, I would submit, than by members of the Liberal Party. Yet we continually hear in this House accusations that Liberals are involved in tax ramps. Mr Hayden knew that figure to be untrue. He knew that it related mainly to blue collar crime, if you like, Mr Deputy Speaker, to blue collar tax exasion by people who are mainly members of the Labor Party. Yet

honourable members opposite, knowing the figures to be untrue, deliberately come into this House and seek to mislead it. As I said yesterday, $10,000m is five times the total earnings of private companies in Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 10.29 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Lionel Bowen to move-
That the sessional orders relating to estimates committees be amended by omitting orders (l) and (2) and substituting the following:
.. (l) After the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, or a Member deputed by him, on the motion for the second reading of the main Appropriation Bill for a year, the proposed expenditures for the departments and services contained in Schedule 2 to that bill and the proposed expenditures for the Parliamentary Departments contained in Schedule 2 to the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill may be referred to an estimates committee. Such referral shall be on motion, moved by a Minister or the Leader or Deputy Leader of the Opposition, of which notice has been given. A committee may be ordered to report by a specified date.
(2) There shall be 6 estimates committees, to be known as Estimates Committees A, B, C, D, E and F, which shall not vote on, but shall examine and report upon proposed expenditures for the Parliamentary Departments, Advance to the Minister for Finance and each Department of State; such report may contain a resolution or expression of opinion of the committee but shall not vary the amount or a proposed expenditure" .
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature, to make loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to make provision for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 15 September 1982, pursuant to statute:
Audit Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 209.
Banking Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 213.
Defence Service Homes Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 214.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 210.
Judiciary Act-Rules of Court-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 216.

Papers

15 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1507

Lands Acquisition Act~Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
Patents Act~Regulations~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 21t.
Remuneration Tribunals Act~Regulation~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 207.
Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Power Act~ Regulations~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 215.
Superannuation Act~Regulation~Statutory Rules 1982, No. 208.
Trade Commissioners Act~Regulations~Statutory Rules 1982,No.212.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library Mr Holding to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) Were Mr H. de S. C. MacLean, Mr M. J. Brudenall and Mr P. J. Judge on the short list recommended to the Presiding Officers by the selection panel as suitable candidates for the position of Parliamentary Librarian; if not, who were the candidates named by the panel.

(2) Has Mr Brian Harvey, a former Operations Manager, Department of the House of Representatives, been considered for the position; if so, on what basis and on whose recommendations.
(3) Has Mr D. J. T. Englefield, Deputy Librarian, House of Commons Library, also been considered for the position; if so, on what basis and on whose recommendations.
(4) In view of the Government's full agreement with the Senate Resolution of 26 November 1981 that the Joint Parliamentary Library Committee be kept informed of the procedures to be adopted in the Librarian's appointment, and that the Committee be given an opportunity to express its views:
(a) what are the dates of all meetings of the Library Committee since 26 November 1981;
(b) what are the details of information given to that Committee about procedures for the Librarian's appointment,and
(c) on what dates did members of the Library Committee express any views about appointment of the Librarian.
(5) In view of the considerable period which has elapsed since Mr H. G. Weir ceased active duty as Parliamentary Librarian, can the Presiding Officers say when the position will be filled on a permanent basis.


