House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 128, 1982 Tuesday, 24 August 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Notices ofMotion

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 799

Tuesday, 24 August 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) is unwell. The Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) will be Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce until Sir Phillip returns to duty.

That this House-
(1) condemns the refusal of the United States Government to grant visas to a number of Australian citizens to enter the United States to attend the United Nations Second Special Session on Disarmament, as non-government organisation representatives;
(2) supports the protests to the United States Government by the governments, or foreign Ministers, of other countries, notably Japan, over denial of visas to citizens to those countries in similar circumstances; and
(3) calls on the Australian Government to formally protest at this misuse of the location of the United Nations by the United States Government to restrict access to the Second Special Session on Disarmament.

VISAS FOR SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCES
Notice of Motion
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) endorses the principle that
(a) scientific conferences ought to be open to the widest possible qualified representation; and
(b) nations ought not to apply the political sanction of refusing visas to qualified scientists as a means of expressing disapproval of foreign and military policies of the nations from which they come;
(2) regrets the refusal of visas to two members of a delegation from the USSR, Professor Y. A. Orchinnikov and Professor S. S. Debov, both of the Soviet Academy of Science, to attend the Conference of the International Union of Biochemists to be held in Perth in August 1982; and
(3) calls on the Government to reverse its decision and grant the visas.
LEBANON
Notice of Motion
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) strongly supports the ceasefire in Lebanon and calls upon both Israel and the Palestinian forces to scrupulously observe the terms of the ceasefire settlement;
(2) calls on neighbouring states to ensure the reconstruction of Lebanon without interference and for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon;
(3) presses major powers to use their influence to underwrite peaceful reconstruction;
(4) commends the Government for its commitment to the rebuilding of Beirut and calls on other governments to follow this example; and
(5) encourages the newly elected President of Lebanon, Mr Bashir Gemayel, in the difficult but important task of unifying and establishing a free Lebanon.
The motion will be seconded by the honourable member for Bowman (Mr lull).
VISAS FOR UNITED NATIONS SECOND SPECIAL SESSION ON DISARMAMENT
Notice of Motion
Mr FRY (Fraser)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:

PRICES AND INCOMES
Notice of Motion
Mr BURR (Wilmot)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House urges the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Council of Trade Unions to rescind their mutual policy of control over prices and incomes, in particular, control over non-wage incomes.
PRESIDENT OF LEBANON
Notice of Motion
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) congratulates Bashir Gemayel upon his elevation as
President elect of [he State of Lebanon; and
(2) expresses(a) the wish that the new President will be successful in his stated quest to remove all aggressors including Israelis, Syrians and hostile Palestinians from Lebanese soil, and (b) the hope that the President elect can successfully unite all Lebanese, Christians, Moslems, and other groups living in Lebanon into one united peaceful Lebanon for the Lebanese.
PETROL: RETAIL PRICE
Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) expresses its grave concern at the huge disparity in the
retail price of petrol in the various capital cities and the country areas of Australia, and
(2) calls for the establishment of a Select Committee of the House to-
(a) inquire into the reasons why the public is charged different prices for petrol in different parts of Australia, and
(b) decide on action to overcome this serious problem.
MR LECH WALESA
Notice of Motion
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:

800 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Questions without Notice

That this House(I) notes the acceptance for consideration by the Nobel Peace Prize Committee of the nomination of Mr Lech Walesa of Poland, and
(2) supports Mr Walesa's candidature for the 1982 Nobel Peace Prize.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAXATION
Mr ARMITAGE-I refer the Prime Minister to the mounting campaign being conducted against his Government's proposed retrospective legislation directed at bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes and his assurances that he would not be influenced in this campaign. Is the Prime Minister aware of reports that lobbyists for this campaign have visited him, the Treasurer and Treasury officials to push their case against the Government's measures? Are these reports true? Did the lobbyists include two former senior members of the Prime Minister's own staff? If so, in view of his statements that tax evaders are robbing the Commonwealth, will he now review his employment procedures to ensure that in future he does not again employ persons sympathetic to this objective?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I believe that the last part of the honourable gentleman's question is an undue, unreasonable and scurrilous reflection on people who have been asked to put a point of view on behalf of clients. It does not necessarily mean that it is their point of view at all. I hope all members of this Parliament will accept that all points of view have a right to be put. It does not mean to say that they will be accepted, but they at least have a right to be put. If anyone in this Parliament accepts the proposition that certain views have no right even to be put and argued, then he is saying something very fundamental which I think would be anathema to most of us.
The only people who have approached me are the two gentlemen the honourable member mentioned. It was a relatively brief telephone conversation. I do not believe any comfort would have been given out of that conversation to anyone who employed those lobbyists in that instance. I ought to make the point that a report on the second page of the Melbourne Sun News-Pictorial this morning is not correct. I understand a correcting statement is being issued in relation to that and that the State president of the party in Victoria supports what the Government is doing because he understands the reasons why we are doing it. Although nobody really likes the question of retrospectivity, in this instance and in these circumstances if there is what people regard as an

element of retrospectivity in the legislation, that cannot be avoided.
I make the point that the Government is not creating an obligation; it is only determined to collect funds which were due and which should have been paid in the normal course of events but which were avoided or evaded. As I indicated at a luncheon in Sydney on Friday, in a very real sense the beneficiaries of what happened are in receipt of stolen funds-whether one wants to say stolen from the generality of taxpayers or stolen from the Commonwealth I do not suppose it makes all that much difference-and the Government has every intention of collecting those funds.
COMMONWEALTH GAMES: VISAS AND DEPARTURE TAX
Mr JULL-My question is directed to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. With the Commonwealth Games just a few weeks away, what facilities are being made available for the quick processing of overseas visitors who may now wish to come to Brisbane as athletes, officials or spectators? Will the usual delays at overseas posts in issuing visitors' visas prevent perhaps thousands of people from coming to Brisbane for the Games? Is the Minister also aware of criticism being levelled at Australia for charging the $20 departure tax for competitors and officials leaving after the Games? Can this be waived? If not, will the Minister move to incorporate the tax in the price of the ticket as is done in most overseas countries?
Mr HODGES-The honourable member for Bowman has a keen interest in the Commonwealth Games for a number of reasons, not the least of which is the fact that he has a number of the very fine facilities for the Games situated within his electorate. Apart from the generous contribution of $lOm that this Government has made to the provision of facilities, it is government policy to assist the Commonwealth Games organising committee wherever possible. Part of that assistance will be that my Department, at its overseas posts, will issue visas to people promptly. Departmental officers have been made well aware of the dates of the Games and they have been told to ensure that people are not unduly delayed. The period of stay will allow people to come to Australia to view the Games and also to visit friends or relatives here. I recently decided that people in Australia from overseas who wish to take in the Games may have their temporary entry permits extended for that purpose.
Unfortunately competitors and officials, together with visitors, will have to pay the departure tax. The departure tax is required to be paid

Questions without Notice

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 801

by law. The honourable member for Bowman will be only too aware, because he made a study of the tourist industry both in Australia and overseas, that more than 100 countries charge departure tax. On the method of collecting that departure tax in the future, my Department has under consideration options for change so that tax will not be as visible. In many countries in which departure tax is charged the tax is not visible because it is built into the ticket price. We currently have that matter under review.
IMPORTATION OF SPANISH AIRCRAFT
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I address my question to the Treasurer. I refer to a matter raised in the grievance debate and brought to the Treasurer's attention last week. It relates to the importation of a Spanish aircraft, a CASA 200 series 212, by a Melbourne aviation company now known as Jet Corporation of Australia. Did the Australian Taxation Office give a clearance to the importers to declare the aircraft to be new? Was the Taxation Office aware that the aircraft was declared at Customs as a demonstration aircraft? Is it a fact that the aircraft first flew in 1978? Is it a fact that the aircraft was originally an armed forces aircraft in Spain? What criteria did the Taxation Office refer to in declaring the aircraft to be new?
Mr HOWARD-I am not in a position to answer that question today; I hope to be so tomorrow.
1982-83 BUDGET
Mr RUDOOCK-I ask the Prime Minister: What does the Budget do that will provide incentives to those making claims for increases in wages, particularly unions, to diminish those claims?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is a very substantial incentive in the Budget to moderate wage claims as a result of the totality of the measures that the Government introduced. The tax cuts, especially as they affect lower income people, the rebate for housing loan interest, the family allowance and the family income supplement for the lowest income families put a large number of Australian families in a very much better position than they were before the Budget. I believe it is reasonable, and the Australian Council of Trade Unions has recognised that it is reasonable, to think that this establishes a precondition for wage restraint through the course of this year.
The House might be interested in some figures which I have had taken out showing the position, before and after the Budget, of taxpayers with a dependent spouse and two children. The figures

show how much taxpayers would have to get in increased wages if they were to be as well off through claims on their employers as they are, in fact, as a result of the Budget. A taxpayer on $180 a week who, of course, benefits from the family income supplement is a little over $30 better off as a result of the Budget. If he were to get that income from his employer through increased wage claims, he would need a wage increase of $44 or a fraction under 25 per cent. The same person on $200 a week who is $22.40 better off as a result of the Budget would need a wage adjustment from his employer of nearly $33 to be as well off. This would represent an increase of between 16 per cent and 17 per cent in the wages cost to the employer. Somebody on $300 a week is between $17 and $18 better off as a result of the Budget and would need a wage adjustment from his employer of a little over $26 or between 8 per cent and 9 per cent to be as well off. A taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children who is on $400 a week is $22.86 better off and would need a wage adjustment of $42 to be as well off through wage claims as he has been as a consequence of the Budget. These very substantial improvements will affect a very large number of Australian families. The improvements are real and significant. It is totally reasonable to ask and to expect that they will be taken into account in wage claims throughout the rest of this year.
1982-83 BUDGET
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question which is supplementary to the answer he has just given. Is it his expectation that the trade union movement, which represents a host of families in this country concerned about the depletion of their living standards through government policies in the past several years, should alone bear the burden of economic restraint? If not, what constructive proposals does he have in mind in relation to non-wage income, prices and the failure of his Government to clamp down effectively on tax avoidance and evasion? Furthermore--
Government supporters interjecting-
Mr HAYDEN-Well, the Liberal Party is more successful at it at an official level than any other group in the community, as honourable members will hear this afternoon.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will ask his question.
Mr HAYDEN-Does the Prime Minister expect the trade union movement to accept as a credible proposition that wage earning families will be better off as a result of the Budget when a

802 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Questions without Notice

man supporting a wife and two children on average weekly earnings after allowance for inflation adjustment in connection with taxation will be only a little over $3 a week better off this year than last year? Is it a fact that that represents for an average weekly wage earner an improvement of only one per cent in a year when inflation will increase by something like II per cent? In these circumstances does he genuinely expect the trade union movement to accept his sham deals?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The figures are not sham. The figures are real. Once the benefits start flowing from 1 November every Australian family in the categories that benefited from the Budget will know just how real they are. Families will know that the honourable gentleman's rhetoric is quite unreal. I do not think there is very much inducement on any employers at the moment to put up prices unnecessarily or unreasonably. Employers and Australian manufacturers are trying to survive and trying to sell against very tough competition, competition from companies overseas where the wage adjustments have been 5 per cent or 6 per cent a year and where, in many cases, employers and trade unions have willingly accepted a real reduction in living standards so that people can continue to have jobs. It is worth noting that through last year, and more so taking account of hours adjustments through last year, the real increase in wages was 3 per cent to 5 per cent. It is very much more than the rate of inflation. There had been an increase in the year before that. It is just not possible for anyone in this country to expect to go on being paid more in real terms and to work less and to have a sustainable situation within this country. The honourable gentleman does not understand that. I well know the document to which he committed himself last week. On any kind of reading of that document, one can see that it commits him to a minimum of full wage indexation together with a whole host of other and additional benefits through Budgets. If people think that that can be provided without real increases in productivity, without the capacity to sell Australian goods and without the willingness and the capacity to work together so that costs can be kept within bounds, the persons having those views are just living in a fool's paradise. Through this Budget the Government has established the realistic basis for co-operation throughout all parts of this community. Leaving aside the rhetoric of the Leader of the Opposition, I have little doubt that that will be achieved.
NEW SOUTH WALES DROUGHT
Mr SAINSBURY-My question is addressed to the Minister for Primary Industry and refers to

the crippling drought which is affecting many areas of New South Wales including, in particular, my electorate. Is the Minister aware that many small businesses in country towns and villages are now suffering just as much as the farmers? Are there any States in which Commonwealth-State disaster assistance can be extended to heavily affected small business? Can the Minister encourage the New South Wales Government to use Commonwealth and State funds to help alleviate the plight of country small business in drought affected New South Wales?
Mr NIXON-Yes, I am aware of the seriousness of the drought not only in New South Wales but also throughout eastern Australia. Indeed, the drought is getting more serious day by day. The fact of the matter is that assistance for small business is available and is currently being applied in Queensland. That assistance is to the tune of some $30,000 over a seven-year period at an interest rate of 5 per cent and with a repayment holiday period for three years. Similar assistance was granted last year in Western Australia where the activities of small businesses in rural areas were seriously affected because of the drought. In Western Australia, $40,000 was made available for a seven-year period loan with an interest rate of 4 per cent and a two-year repayment holiday. Similar assistance could be granted in New South Wales were the New South Wales Government to apply for it. It could be made part of the core arrangements that are presently in existence and in place in that State. I think it was last year when I invited New South Wales to join small business in the program. It did not do so. It may be that this year, because the drought is running into its fourth year in parts of that State, the New South Wales' Government will recognise the serious effect the drought is having on small businesses in country towns. It may be that New South Wales can be encouraged to apply a similar provision in New South Wales to that which is available in other States. I will certainly do my best to encourage New South Wales to do just that.
1982-83 BUDGET
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister another question about the mirage of better living standards as a result of this Budget. How does he explain-if he stands by his claim that families are better off as a consequence of the Budget-that in this Budget total tax revenue, being in excess of 25 per cent of gross domestic product, is at least as high as last year's record level and conceivably will be higher? Will he, therefore, acknowledge that this Budget rips off taxpayers once again, taking as much as it gives?

Questions without Notice

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 803

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the Leader of the Opposition cannot understand that a lift in the basic threshold results in less tax being paid, if he cannot understand that a reduction in the basic rate from 32c to 30c in the dollar represents less tax being paid and if he cannot understand that the lifting of the second threshold to $19,500 results in less tax being paid, I have to confess that I cannot help him.
WAGE INCREASES
Mr CADMAN-The Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations is aware of figures announced recently by the Australian Bureau of Statistics regarding the 10 per cent increase in the cost of living and the 17 per cent increase in wages last year. Can the Minister inform the House whether there has been any assessment of the extent to which a shorter working week in many industries has added to labour costs? What will be the effect of a real increase in wages of about 7 per cent, plus a 35-hour week, on unemployment and inflation?
Mr MACPHEE-I am advised that the effect of moving from a 40-hour week to a 38-hour week so far has been an increase in the hourly rate of pay in the order of 5 per cent to 7 per cent. That would take the movement in average weekly earnings on an hourly rate to about 20 per cent to 23 per cent over roughly the past year-certainly well in excess of cost of living increases. I believe it behoves all members of this House to support the general call for wage restraint and for no further movements in the reduction of hours of work in order that we can improve our international competitiveness. There is simply no question about it-all our major trading partners have done much better than we have.
It is rare for a Liberal Minister of this House to praise the New South Wales Premier, Mr Wran, but I have had my attention drawn to a statement he made in the New South Wales Parliament on 19 August and I congratulate him upon it. The Premier said then, in introducing a Bill called the Remuneration (Special Provisions) Bill 1982, that his Government is firmly committed to a policy of wage restraint and that it will pursue that policy in the determination of New South Wales Public Service salaries. The Premier went on to say:
. . . this legislation is an expression of the need faced by both the Government and the community to practise wage restraint in a time of difficult economic circumstances.
The Premier indicated that his Government will be submitting to the New South Wales tribunal a case which, I assure the House, is the case which this Government presented to the Commonwealth Remuneration Tribunal and subsequently

to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. It is, in effect, that it is in the public interest that those bodies should take account of the state of the economy and the effects which their decisions have on salaries generally; that the total maximum increase should be 7 per cent, an amount which has found favour with the Commonwealth Remuneration Tribunal; and that it is no longer appropriate when examining wage levels to have regard for comparative wage justice arguments and the positions of similar office holders in the Commonwealth and State governments. It is worth closing with a quotation from the Premier. He said:
. . . in these circumstances it is essential that governments both exhort and practise wage restraint; that governments give leadership in the public sector so that all sections within the community, employers, employees, unions and indeed all wage-fixing tribunals will act responsibly and exercise moderation and restraint.
I congratulate the Premier on his position. He is following the example set by this Government. I hope that it is followed by the Australian Council of Trade Unions as well.
1982-83 BUDGET
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question supplementary to those two which he has already answered on the matter of tax.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will be out of order if he attempts to ask two supplementary questions. I suggest he start afresh.
Mr HAYDEN-The content or substance of the question is supplementary to those which have been asked, but it is perfectly acceptable for me to ask questions of the Prime Minister on matters of tax even if they are, by their nature, supplementary to things which have been raised already.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman declares it to be a second supplementary question, it will be out of order. If he does not so declare it, it will be in order.
Mr HAYDEN-I will not quibble. I ask the Prime Minister: If his claim is correct that people in Australia will be paying less tax as a result of this Budget, will he explain how it comes about that total tax revenue in this Budget-in excess of 25 per cent of gross domestic product-will be as great as and probably greater than the level of last year, which was a record level of tax collections? I further ask: Does he recognise that in a contracting economy, as acknowledged in the Budget, this means a relatively higher overall tax burden for the community?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Subject to correction by the Treasurer, I understand that tax collections rise by 0.3 per cent in real terms, which

804 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Questions without Notice

is a very small increase indeed. The honourable gentleman seems to be indicating a remarkable fa-
cility for confusing his own fantasies with the facts of the present situation. The facts of the present situation are, if I may repeat them for the advantage of the honourable gentleman, and if other honourable members will forgive me while I repeat them: The basic tax threshold is being increased, and that means that less tax will be paid; the basic tax rate of 32¢ in the dollar comes down to 30¢, and that means that less tax will be
paid; the next threshold rises to $19,500, and that means that less tax will be paid; there will be a special rebate of $250 for welfare recipients, and that means that less tax will be paid; there is an increase in the spouse rebate for people with dependent children, and that means that less tax will be paid. There are also inducements for people to invest in the shares of their own companies. There are inducements for small investors to invest in Australian equity and for a tax rebate to be provided as a result of that, and those two measures also will mean that less tax will be paid than would otherwise be the case without this Budget. So, all in all, there are very substantial advantages to Australian families.
The Government has quite unashamedly structured its assistance to meet the needs of families, believing that that was the greatest requirement. It has also done a number of other things to assist the elderly. The family income supplement is again a social welfare first for Australia. This Government has introduced it-not a Labor government, not a socialist government. That particular reform is as far-sighted as was the original introduction of family allowances. The Leader of the Opposition might laugh at that reform, but a reform which enables people in this country to say, for the first time in a long while that low income earners on the lowest wages and with families will be significantly better off than welfare recipients, than somebody entirely supported by the welfare system, is a very significant advance indeed. The improvement for the lowest income working families in Australia through that particular reform will be very substantial.
I have indicated the situation of a taxpayer, with a dependent spouse and two children, on $180 a week, being $30 a week better off as a result of the changes. To get that increase through an employer he would have had to negotiate a wage claim of $44 a week, which for lowest income people just would not have been possible. The Leader of the Opposition may continue to say as much as he likes that people are not better off as a result of these changes, but the more he says it the less credible he becomes not only to members

of this House but also to people outside. So I hope very much that he repeats himself ad nauseum so that the more people the better can understand what a lot of nonsense he is talking.
SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT
Mr IAN ROBINSON-I ask the Minister for Aviation: Is congestion at Sydney (Kingsford Smith) Airport reaching a crisis stage? Would a runway parallel to the main north-south runway accommodate prop jet, medium jet and commuter aircraft and divert the imminent air traffic crisis facing intrastate, interstate and international passengers travelling into and out of Sydney? What steps can the Government take to overcome the opposition of the New South Wales Government to this urgent development of Sydney Airport?
Mr FIFE-Last week I answered a question similar to that which has just been asked by the honourable member for Cowper. I take the opportunity in answering his question to stress again that there is an urgent need for some additional capacity in the Sydney area. The honourable member for Cowper has asked whether an additional runway parallel to the present north-south runway would overcome the difficulties. The short answer is yes. There are, however, two options within that general proposition. One option would be for the present north-south runway to be duplicated. A second option would be to have a shortened runway, a runway that would extend from the east-west runway south to the end of the present north-south runway. Although no decision has been taken, I think that shortened version would probably be the preferred option because it would satisfy the need and obviously it would be a great deal less expensive.
As I said last week, the Government is concerned to improve the position in the Sydney area. The honourable member asked what the Commonwealth can do to bring its view and the State's view closer together. I have been giving a great deal of consideration to the matter over recent weeks. I hope to be in a position soon to place some options before the Commonwealth Government. Obviously, if an option is approved that option will be discussed with the New South Wales Government. We need to have the cooperation of the State Government in relation to a possible new north-south runway at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport and also in relation to determining the site for a new airport. The surface facilities are largely the responsibility of State governments and there would be no point in determining a site for a second airport unless the

Questions without Notice

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 805

State Government was party to that decision and was prepared to provide the necessary train and/or road access.
UNEMPLOYMENT
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Is the Prime Minister aware of a report in the National Times of 22 August headed 'Liberal's research shows unemployment no worry'? If so, does this reflect the Government's attitude to unemployment as indicated by the estimated increase of 3 per cent proposed in the Treasurer's Budget Speech? Has this Government abandoned all attempts to come to grips with the unemployment crisis?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I had not seen that report in the National Times. It falls into the category of weekend newspapers which I do not read, but I thank the honourable gentleman for his information. The impression that the honourable gentleman sought to convey in his question is the reverse of the truth. A great many elements in this Budget are designed to assist the unemployed, and the young unemployed in particular. The very substantial increase in capital works and the increases in welfare housing obviously will add to construction and to employment in ways that would not otherwise be possible. The Australian Bicentennial Roads Development Program will assist local government and other authorities in providing greater work opportunities than would otherwise be the case.
There are a number of areas where we have provided significant assistance. The young people who are most at risk in this country are those who leave school as soon as they get to the end of the compulsory school age. Some years ago a secondary allowance scheme was introduced to encourage low income families to try to keep their kids at school for the last couple of years of schooling. In this last Budget we increased the means test for the secondary allowance by 44 per cent as well as increasing the actual allowance very considerably. The Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowances also have been considerably increased. As well, further adjustments have been made in the TEAS means test. This is obviously designed to make it easier, especially for lower income families, to keep young Australians in education or in training in the present climate. These are not the only things that are necessary.
The employment programs under the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations are being significantly expanded and a very large number of training places and a larger number of apprenticeships will be supported by the Commonwealth this year. Funds in these areas will have risen to a record $250m by the end of the

year. A large part of this is designed to assist, support and be helpful to young Australians.
There are other areas where I think this community could do a great deal to help young people, especially at school. I was at a forum yesterday morning where about 100 people under the Queen Elizabeth Trust arrangements had been brought to Canberra for a symposium for a week. They are mostly academically inclined, brighter and more intelligent students. I asked how many of them thought that the students who had manual skills, as opposed to intellectual skills, got a fair go in their own schools. A very large number of these young Australians believe that they did not get a fair go in their schools. Attention was drawn to this point by the Schools Commission in a report about two years ago. That has significantly influenced the money that we are spending on the school to work transition programs. I must say that the bias in many secondary schools, both government and, I would suggest, private, towards the academically inclined is a very substantial bias. Those with skills of a different kind, such as manual skills, often are ignored, pushed aside or given the feeling of frustration at those schools. This is an area where I would have thought all honourable members of this Parliament would show a concern at the opportunities that are offered LO young Australians. If the particular point that I am making is to be overcome it will involve a change of attitude by school authorities and by many teachers and many hundreds of thousands of schools throughout Australia.
DROUGHT RELIEF
Mr BAUME-My question is to the Prime Minister and follows an earlier question from the honourable member for Eden-Monaro on the impact of drought on small business. What action has the Government taken to assist all those affected by the current severe drought in New South Wales, and in my electorate in particular which has been declared drought affected for the second time in three years? What also has been done about the Victorian Premier's request for financial assistance for drought relief?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Commonwealth is very concerned about the increasing severity of the drought, not just in New ,South Wales but also in parts of Queensland and Victoria and indeed in significant parts of every State of the Commonwealth. I cannot recall in a long while a drought that at this point was as widespread as it now is. Many of the cropping areas, the wheat areas, are already a write-off for this season; for some that is a write-off for the second

806 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Questions without Notice

year in a row. The pastoral areas are facing great difficulty. Many of them could be saved by a substantial change in the weather pattern over the next two or three weeks, but there is no sign of
that coming. The concern that is being felt over vast parts of the whole Australian continent is very great indeed.
Once the relatively small base figures that need
to be met by States resources are met, the Commonwealth provides $3 for every $1 that is provided by the States. Over the last two years the Commonwealth has provided $100m or more to the States for drought relief. Because of the concerns that we feel, the Minister for Primary Industry has asked his Department to examine immediately the measures that are provided and supported by the States and by the Commonwealth. This information will be brought back before the Commonwealth Government very
shortly.
I have written to the State Premiers today asking them to support an urgent meeting of the Australian Agricultural Council, which the Minister for Primary Industry will convene, so that drought assistance measures right across the Commonwealth can be examined against the background of need and, in particular, the necessity to maintain the viability of the breeding flocks across Australia. There is not the slightest doubt that, as things stand at the moment, there will be a very substantial reduction in the sheep and beef herds in Australia. That reduction, in addition to the disasters that have occurred in the cropping areas, will have a substantial impact throughout the whole economy. In these circumstances governments need to assess and to re-examine the basic core measures that have had support. Some States, for example in relation to those core measures, have been more generous than others and have been prepared to support larger carry-on loans than other States.
These things need to be examined. I hope the States will examine these matters urgently because not only do we need adequate agreement between the Commonwealth and the States as to the kinds of measures that ought to be supported and promoted, but also do the States which have been administratively responsible for giving assistance to farmers hurt by the drought need to make sure that they can do so very quickly and very speedily with the minimum of administrative delays. I hope that all these things can be reassessed at the meeting that will be held. Before that meeting occurs the Commonwealth will be reexamining the measures that it believes can or should be supported. Whenever a statement can be made as a result of that and as a result of the

meeting it will be made. But we are looking for the fullest possible co-operation of the States, the Premiers and their Ministers in relation to this matter.
AIRCRAFT NOISE
Mr LIONEL BOWEN~I ask the Minister for Aviation whether the Government has a report from its acoustics department which clearly shows that at least a quarter of a million people are seriously affected by the noise of aircraft from Sydney Airport. Is it not a fact that there is a great deal of danger to life and limb in the sense that there could be accidents involving planes either on the ground or in the air or the failure of planes when in flight? Is it not a fact that the most recent fatality that ocurred there within the last two and a half years resulted in everybody being killed because there was nowhere for a plane to land in an emergency? Further, is it not a fact that, if the plane had landed in the petroleum complex in Botany Bay, which is immediately adjacent to the north-south runway and any extension of it, there would have been an explosion which could have exterminated virtually half of Sydney?
Government members~Oh!
Mr LIONEL BOWEN~I cannot debate the matter.
Mr SPEAKER~The honourable gentleman will ask his question.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN~ls it not a fact that the Botany Bay terminal has a large concentration of petroleum complexes and any plane landing in it would create an enormous explosion? In view of all these matters which concern the people ofSydney and the residents of about six electorates, and in view of the evidence already given to the Government to the effect that there should be a second airport for Sydney, will the Minister desist from suggesting that the solution is to increase the hazard rather than to obtain a suitable second airport for Sydney?
Mr FIFE~ I am very sensitive to the problems caused to people who live near airports and, in particular, large airports. When I was a member of the New South Wales Parliament I resided quite close to Kingsford-Smith Airport. I was right under the flight path. So, I am personally sensitive to the kinds of problems to which the honourable member refers. Because of this concern, I have referred the question of aircraft noise to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. I have asked that Committee to consider giving me an urgent report on Sydney Airport. I am conscious

General

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 807

of those kinds of difficulties and the inconvenience and the hazards to which the honourable member has referred. I hasten to add that this is not an easy problem to resolve. It is not easy in relation to any airport because we all require airports for our convenience but none of us wants to have the airports close to where we reside, so a balance has to be struck between those two points of view. That is what I am trying to do in relation to the reference to the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation and in reference to the points of view that have been expressed by the State Government.
I do not propose to refer to that part of the honourable member's question which related to a recent tragic accident. Members of this House and the public will be aware that that matter is at present subject to an inquiry and it would be quite wrong to make any substantive response to that part of the honourable member's question. I give the honourable member and other honourable members who represent electorates in the Sydney area an assurance that every aspect of this matter will be examined. Insofar as the selection of a site for a new airport is concerned, we stand ready to co-operate with the State Government tomorrow if necessary in trying to determine a site that will be acceptable to both the State Government and the Commonwealth Government.
1982-83 BUDGET
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-MrSpeaker, with your indulgence, may I add briefly to an answer I gave earlier today?
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I pointed out that there will be a real rise in revenue of 0.3 per cent or $87m after inflation is taken into account. The tax dodge revenue, of course, will be about $840m, so it will be only because of recouping tax dodge funds that there will be any real increase in revenue.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE 1981-82
Statement of Expenditure
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I present the following paper:
Advance to the Minister for Finance 1981-82-Statement of Heads of Expenditure and the amounts charged thereto pursuant to section 36A of the Audit Act 1901.
Ordered that the statement be taken into consideration in the Committee of the Whole House at the next sitting.

DEPARTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Vice President of the Executive Council)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet for 1981-82.
DEPARTMENT OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE EXECUTIVE
COUNCIL
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Vice President of the Executive Council)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the Department of the Vice President of the Executive Council for 1981-82.
CANBERRA DEVELOPMENT BOARD
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the Canberra Development Board for 1980-81.
NOMINAL DEFENDANT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the Nominal Defendant of the Australian Capital Territory for 1981.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY MILK AUTHORITY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the Australian Capital Territory Milk Authority for 1980-81.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 5 of the Parliament Act 1974, I present proposals for construction of Stage 1 extensions of 7,000 square metres to the National Library of Australia building in Parkes, in accordance with the original master plan for the Library. The views of the Joint Committee on the New Parliament House are also being sought. When those views are available I shall be in a position to take further action under the Parliament Act to seek approval of the work by the House and the Senate.
QUESTION TIME: SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTIONS
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I ask you to help the

808 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Question Time: Supplementary Questions

House by expanding on a ruling you gave at Question Time. I make the request seriously because it is necessary that we understand the principles upon which the Standing Orders are applied so that there can be consistency, at least on our part, in understanding your probable responses. You will recall that at Question Time I asked a second question but in alternate order, as is the practice, of the Prime Minister and I mentioned that it was supplementary in respect of the matter which had been raised; that is, concerning taxation. You ruled that if I were to declare it to be a supplementary question it would be out of order. I note that Standing Order 151 declares:
Questions may be asked without notice. At the discretion of the Speaker supplementary questions may be asked to elucidate an answer.
That seems to mean, if we take up what seems to be the import of your ruling, Mr Speaker, that whether one declares a succeeding question, asked alternately as is the practice in this House, to be a supplementary question does not matter. Should the question be supplementary, in the sense that it seeks to extract more information or is an elucidation of an answer given earlier, you will rule it out of order. If that is to be the practice I suggest it is an extraordinary situation. By its implication-I presume this would not be your wish-it declares that in future a Minister, having given an answer to a question no matter how provenly misleading it may be, or wrong in fact, or just as a matter of natural and proper curiosity requiring more information, you, Mr Speaker, would not allow a further question, whether declared as supplementary, which sought to extract more information or an elucidation based on the answer given earlier. Mr Speaker, can you clarify this matter because it is very important to the proper functioning of this House? If I am correct in my interpretation of the implications of what you have put then you are imposing an extraordinary restriction on the Opposition. If I am not correct, can you concisely and substantially explain exactly what is the import of that ruling?
Mr SPEAKER-The Standing Orders formerly were specific and allowed only one supplementary question. The honourable gentleman asks me for my directions so he ought to listen and hear. The Standing Orders formerly stated that a question would be out of order if it were more than one supplementary question. In other words, one supplementary question was permitted and not otherwise. This gave rise to debate in the House in that an honourable member would ask a question not declaring it to be a supplementary question and some other honourable member

would challenge the question as being out of order on the ground that it really was supplementary, whether so declared or not. That gave rise to arguments in this House as to whether a question was, in fact, a second supplementary question. In order to overcome the challenge from the floor of the House the Standing Orders were amended to allow supplementary questions-plural-to be asked and that was left in the discretion of the Speaker. My interpretation is that the practice of the House hitherto will remain where a member declares himself to be asking a second supplementary question. That is what the honourable gentleman did. He asked one question, received the next subsequent call from the Opposition side and said: 'I ask a supplementary question'. He received the next call from the Opposition side and said: 'I ask a second supplementary question'. I then told him that if he persisted in calling it a second supplementary question I would rule it out of order. I adhere to that ruling; I think it is a correct ruling. That has been the intention of the House during the period I have been here.
Mr HAYDEN-According to the dictionary a supplement is 'something that is added to to overcome deficiencies'. So, Mr Speaker, you are giving a fairly restrictive interpretation. I think, with respect, we ought to clarify this point because it could be--
Mr SPEAKER-The question has been clarified very simply. If the honourable gentleman persists in asking a question, which he declares to be a second supplementary question, I will rule him out of order. I will not allow other honourable members on the floor of the House to raise a point of order and allege what is not declared to be a supplementary question to be, in fact, on an interpretation, a second supplementary question.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, what you are really saying is that I can ask a supplementary question as often as I like so long as I do not tell anyone it is supplementary.
Mr SPEAKER-That is the fact.
Mr HAYDEN-With respect, Mr Speaker, I think it is a silly quibble about semantics.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may think it is a silly quibble about semantics. He is entitled to that view. As I have indicated to him before, any view, no matter how outrageous or how far it departs from the Standing Orders or practice of this House, can be stated. I have merely to rule on it. That is my only responsibility.
Sir James Killen-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I do not wish to be mean on the point. If

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 809

the Leader of the Opposition would look at House of Representatives Practice he would find the decisions that have been made. I find the position quite clear. The Standing Orders were amended to enable the discretion to rest entirely with Mr Speaker. That is the position today. Otherwise Question Time would develop into a raging debate.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Mr DOBIE (Cook)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, I present the Committee's report on Namibia, together with the transcript of evidence.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr DOBIE-by leave-This report on Namibia is tabled at a time when Namibia is very much in the news. For some weeks now there have been reports that the South West Africa People's Organisation and South Africa are on the verge of agreement on a settlement which will lead to independence for the territory after some 62 years of administration by South Africa following its occupation of the former German territory during the First World War. If agreement is reached on a settlement, and Namibia proceeds to independence early in 1983, then will end one of the longest running disputes to have occupied the United Nations since its formation in 1945.
Between the two world wars Namibia was administered by South Africa under a League of Nations mandate. However, South Africa refused to convert the mandate into a United Nations trusteeship agreement after World War II and has continued to administer the territory in defiance of repeated United Nations demands to withdraw and turn the territory over to UN administration prior to its independence. South African refusal to leave the territory led the South West Africa People's Organisation-SWAPO-to begin a guerrilla campaign against South Africa in the mid-I 960s. The guerrilla war has increased in intensity over the years and has cost several thousand lives. Although in recent years South Africa has acknowledged Namibia's right to independence, so far it has not been able to agree on acceptable terms for a transition to independence, despite almost continuous negotiations involving the United Nations, a group of Western countries known as the Contact Group and SWAPO.
The major obstacle to agreement in the current negotiations appears to be South Africa's demand that a settlement in Namibia be accompanied by a withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Cuban troops were invited into Angola in 1975 by that

country's Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-MPLA-Government to counter a South African incursion and to help the MPLA in its civil war with the other major group in Angola, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, UNITA. Cuban troops have remained since and as recently as three weeks ago were engaged in large scale operations against UNITA forces. South Africa argues that the continued presence of an estimated 20,000 Cuban troops in
Angola during a Namibian transition to independence could encourage SWAPO to continue its guerilla war should it lose independence elections. South Africa is also concerned at what it sees as a growing Soviet influence in the region. It appears to be using the issue of Namibian independence to try to reduce that influence by making a Cuban withdrawal its condition for an end to the guerrilla war.
SWAPO has rejected the South African linkage of a Cuban withdrawal from Angola with the issue of Namibian independence and Angola has stated that it will not ask Cuban forces to leave until Namibia is independent and until South African cross-border raids stop. Whether South Africa or SWAPO and Angola will modify their positions on the Cuban issue remains to be seen. South Africa is under Western pressure to agree to a settlement while SWAPO is under similar pressure from the front-line states. The front-line states, particularly Angola, would like the Namibia issue settled so they can concentrate on their growing economic problems. Front-line states such as Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Zambia and Botswana are also concerned that the longer the guerrilla war continues in Namibia, the greater the opportunity for unrest and a possible increase in Soviet influence in the region.
Of the six front line states, even the two most Soviet aligned countries, Angola and Mozambique, are showing signs of disillusionment with the Soviet Union. Their experience generally is that Soviet military aid for independence struggles has not been followed through with satisfactory post-independence relationships. Soviet development aid is considered inadequate and often ill suited to their needs. African trade with the Soviet bloc frequently results in major deficits for the countries concerned. Both Angola and Mozambique in recent months have been seeking closer economic links with the West. While the front line states would like a Namibia settlement and are impressing this on SWAPO some analysts have argued that SWAPO is also under pressure from the Soviet Union, as its main backer and supplier of weapons, to delay negotiations in order to continue destabilisation of the region.

810 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

This would give the Soviet Union continued justification for maintaining its presence, including what are generally considered to be its surrogate forces, the Cubans.
In the current negotiations South Africa and SWAPO are reported to have reached agreement
on nearly all issues except that of the linkage of a Cuban troop withdrawal with a settlement. Involving, as it does, a third party, Angola, this broadens the question of a Namibia settlement into a regional settlement. The Committee, in its report, takes the view that this will only further
delay Namibian independence. Angola, unless strongly pressured by fellow front line states, is unlikely to agree to give up the Cuban presence unless it obtains guarantees from South Africa that it will cease its raids into Angola and cease supporting UNITA. The South African demand broadens the Namibia issue and could make a solution more difficult.
The Committee also considers that Walvis Bay should be part of an independent Namibia, and that its retention by South Africa after independence could continue to cause tensions in the area. Walvis Bay is the only deep water port on the Namibian coast. Its continued retention by South Africa would provide South Africa with a degree of economic influence over Namibia which would be unacceptable to most independent countries. Continued retention of the port and its surrounding territory by South Africa would ignore claims for the incorporation of the port based on considerations of geography, history, economics and ethnic origin, as well as political and, equally importantly, moral considerations.
In the chapter on Australia and Namibia, the Committee details the attitudes of present and previous governments concerning Namibia, outlines Australian aid and examines areas of possible international competition between Australia and an independent Namibia, particularly in the export of diamonds and uranium. The Committee endorses Australian participation in a United Nations transitional assistance group presence in Namibia in the period prior to independence. It argues that while Australia does not have a major direct role to play in the Namibia dispute and while it does not have a direct strategic interest in Namibia, the region of which Namibia is a part is of strategic concern. Instability in the southern Africa region, in its effect on the major powers, could be of considerable importance to Australia. Therefore, a Namibia settlement is in Australia's interests, even apart from the equally valid considerations of morality and justice. Namibia has a sound economic basis for independence and the sooner independence is

granted the sooner will its people be able to live in peace, equality and personal dignity. Before I conclude I pay a tribute to Mr John Vanderwyk, the Committee's acting secretary, Mrs Maureen Weeks, its research officer and to alI members of the staff who have alIowed us to complete this report under very difficult circumstances.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-by leave-I join with the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence in expressing thanks to the various members of the Committee staff for the work they have put into the preparation of this report. I also say that a tribute must be paid to the members of the sub-committee in the previous Parliament as a substantial proportion of the work on this report was done in the previous Parliament. The work done by the Committee in this Parliament has largely been a matter of bringing the report up to date. Therefore, the judgments in it reflect to a considerable degree those of previous committees and previous Committee members.
I would like to highlight a number of points about the Committee's report. The first is that I think that when the report is printed and the general public gets to read it people will find that the understanding within Australia of the historical record of this issue has been substantialIy advanced. Basically, the report deals with the historical record and only secondarily with recommendations on what contemporary policies ought to be. The report is generally supportive of the direction of government policy. It tends to emphasise the need in the minds of the majority of the Committee's members for a certain amount of delicacy and moderation in the negotiating process. I think-if I can express one personal reservation-that occasionally the recommendations are a little too placatory in this regard. Nevertheless, they are reasonably welI argued points.
One matter that is contained in the report, which will be increasingly important over the next few months and, therefore, bears particular reading, is an analysis of the claims by the various representatives of Namibian independence movements and South Africa to the Walvis Bay area. Readers will find on page 192 of the report a map which gives the location of Walvis Bay-how central it is to the advancement of the Namibian economy after independence, how very distant it is from South Africa and what an absurdity it would be if independence were to be granted and that particular area not included within Namibia shortly thereafter. There is a very real possibility that that could become a running sore and a source of continuing dispute between Namibia

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 811

and South Africa. Much of the advantage that would be gained by Namibian independence in strategic terms as opposed solely to social justice considerations could well be lost if the South Africans do not change their current position on the issue.
The Committee takes up this point and advises,
in one of its recommendations, that it acknowledges the legal argument presented by South Africa in its claims to Walvis Bay but notes also shifting interpretations of international law in relation to such claims. It expresses the opinion that, whatever in Australia's view the legal position might be, it should be subordinated to political, moral and other considerations based on geography, history, economics and ethnic origin.
Further, the Committee has advised the South African Government that it does not consider that South Africa's concern at the unlikely possibility of a substantial Soviet base at Walvis Bay outweighs the value to the West of a resolution of disputes in the region. Honourable members may well be aware that South Africa seeks to convince the Western powers that are assisting in the negotiation of Namibian independence that for Walvis Bay not to remain in South African hands would encourage a substantial Soviet naval presence in the area and a threat to Western sea lanes.
I think the first point that needs to be made on
that claim is that suggestions that Soviet bases are developing in the area often prove to be something of a chimera. When they are genuine, as was the case in Berbera in Somalia, they were short lived. In the case of Alexandria in Egypt, they were also short lived. The Soviets have been notably unsuccessful in converting any other of their friendly relations with other Indian Ocean powers or, in this case, a southern Atlantic power, into meaningful substantial military strategic positions. What is absolutely certain, as the Chairman pointed out, is that, if there is not a resolution of this particular issue, the instability in that area that will be created will be very much to the detriment of the interests of the West, Australia and, I suspect, South Africa. If the Walvis Bay issue is not settled, the possibility of South Africa maintaining peaceful and sensible relationships with Namibia will be pretty short lived indeed and many of the advantages, as I said before, in strategic as opposed to social justice terms of a resolution of the conflict will be lost. A further point that the Committee detailed, I think particularly effectively, is the relationship between the development of the Namibian economy and Australia. The Chairman briefly passed over the question of diamonds and uranium. In some areas Australia is a direct competitor. Of course, we on this side of

the House would probably take Australia out of one area of competition over a period. That may well be very considerably to the advantage of the Namibian economy.
On the general economic question, there is a very substantial analysis of the record in labour relations and in economic exploitation of the Namibian area and its people over a considerable period of South African rule. It has been a substantial and very damaging exploitation. There have been reforms recently, particularly in the treatment of labour in Namibia, which have been welcomed by the Committee but, as it points out, the long term consequences of that exploitation will be very severe and will poison race relations probably for some considerable time. The Committee notes too that there is justification in charges of exploitation and excessive repatriation of profits by foreign companies. It disputes the argument that the desire to continue that exploitation is a substantial reason in South Africa deliberately or unduly delaying independence and says that the South African view on that I think rightly-could be seen more as a product of strategic and military calculation than a desire to continue economic exploitation. Nevertheless, the effect of the continued administration of Namibia by South Africa unquestionably results in these trends continuing as it is South African policy that they should continue.
The Committee takes one view with which I do not entirely agree; that is, that little purpose is served in raking over the past in regard to economic relations in order to consider the question of reparations. I still think there is some value in discussing that even though the likelihood of South Africa paying reparations is remote because that, at least, is a useful bargaining tool that emphasises further the moral case that the South West Africa People's Organisaton-SWAPO-has for a rapid conclusion of an agreement on independence. The Committee expresses to SWAPO on a number of occasions throughout the report the view that compromises ought to be made with South Africa to achieve independence as quickly as possible. I think that some of us on this side of the House would be a little concerned that perhaps too much emphasis is placed on SWAPO not giving up its claims, for the purposes of negotiation, to be the sole authoritative negotiating body of the South West African people, the Namibian people. Nevertheless there has been an indication by SWAPO representatives in the past that they are prepared to do that for the period of negotiations and let an election take its course. I do not think

812 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

that there would be too many people on the Committee who did not believe that in the first postindependence election SWAPO would be successful in much the same way as Mugabe was in Zimbabwe. As I said at the outset, the report is a useful historical record which I think will add substantially to public understanding of the issues in a complicated and important area.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that there are in the gallery a number of young people who have arrived here by a process of selection to participate in the National Capital Forum for Young Australians.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Debate resumed.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins)-by leave-The report on Namibia by the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence follows one tabled two years earlier on Zimbabwe. The Committee, first through its Sub-committee on Southern Africa and then through the Sub-committee on Middle Eastern and African affairs, has been closely following events in the southern Africa region for some years. It is a bipartisan report and has the approval of members of both sides of the Parliament, who are in agreement on issues in the report. That is a point which is often missed in the reporting of the tabling of such reports in the Parliament. The Committee is concerned that instability in the southern Africa region may have wider repercussions, particularly for relations between the major powers. At the moment the focus of instability in the region is Namibia and the tabling of this report is timely.
The territory of Namibia has been administered by South Africa for some 60 years. For many years South Africa wanted to incorporate Namibia into its own territory but for the past few years it has acknowledged the territory's right to become an independent nation. However, despite years of almost continuous negotiations no formula for independence acceptable to both South Africa and the South West Africa People's Organisation-SWAPO-has yet emerged. The current round of negotiations, known as the three phase settlement proposals, appear to be the most promising yet. Reports that a settlement is near have appeared over the past few weeks, although they have become more cautious in their forecasts since the South African raid into Angola about two weeks ago. That raid is seen by some as yet

another delaying tactic on the part of South Africa while other commentators view it as part of manoeuvres on the part of South Africa and SWAPO to gain maximum advantage prior to a ceasefire and settlement.
Whether the three-phase settlement plan achieves success will become apparent in the coming weeks and months. But, whatever the outcome the Committee's report has appeared at what may well be a turning point in the affairs of the Territory. The Committee's report is a comprehensive one. It traces the history of the Namibia dispute from its origins in a League of Nations mandate to the present. It considers a number of political, social and economic issues, including the controversy over the status of Walvis Bay, and examines Australian involvement and interest in the territory.
Earlier I said that the Namibia dispute was important in terms of its effects on the stability of the southern Africa region. I did not mean to imply by that statement that the strategic issues are the only reasons for the Committee's interest, Namibia is important also in terms of international moral issues-the right of peoples to govern themselves, to be free and to regard themselves as equals whatever their racial or ethnic origin. It is unfortunate that the South African administration of Namibia has been in terms of that country's racial policies, and it is only since about 1977 that South Africa has begun dismantling its apartheid policies in Namibia. South Africa has acknowledged international opinion and moved to abolish discrimination in that territory. In South Africa itself today I believe that recognition ought to be given to the efforts to effect change by Prime Minister Botha and I believe he should receive more international support for what he is trying to achieve. If he is successful he will show that managed change can take place peacefully for the benefit of all South Africans. It is to be hoped that Namibia will soon become an independent nation and that the divisions based on race, which have been a feature of South Africa's administration of the territory, will become a thing of the past.
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN RURAL AND PROVINCIAL AUSTRALIA
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

Employment Opportunities in Australia

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 813

The Government's failure to protect existing employment and promote new employment opportunities in rural and provincial Australia.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (3.8)-Throughout the length and breadth of rural and provincial Australia there is unanimous concern for the future of employment and hence the economic viability of these areas. That this ailing Government has failed even those people whom it is reputed it serves most of all will not be forgotten by the people who live outside the metropolitan cities of this nation. There is a worry-indeed, a major concern-among all sections of the community in these areas about the appalling shallowness and limitations of the Fraser Government's attitude to manpower planning. We have heard recently about the fate of the Government's decision to sell the Bendigo Ordnance Factory following the report of the now infamous razor gang's recommendations.
Following the resounding victory of the State Australian Labor Party candidate, Mr David Kennedy, over the incumbent Liberal at the election earlier this year, the Federal Government recognised that its tenancy in Bendigo was about to be terminated. The recent piece of amateur theatrics which we witnessed in this House will not reassure the people of Bendigo and will not engender in them trust in the Federal Government or their local member. There is no doubt they will treat him as he deserves and cast him into the political scrap heap. The possibilities for sound usage of a resource such as the Ordnance Factory would have stimulated economic activity in Bendigo. Had the Government had an adequate policy of manpower planning it would have enabled the Ordnance Factory to engage more systematically in commercial work. As has been pointed out in the joint judgment of Justices Gavan Duffy, Evatt and McTiernan, as quoted in the minority report of the Select Committee on the Government Clothing and Ordnance Factories, the full usage of the specialist staff of that factory engaged in the manufacture of naval and military equipment would have a very important effect not only upon employment but also for the future of our defence arm. The justices stated:
Consequently the sales of clothing . . .
Referring to an earlier decision-
outside the regular military forces are not to be regarded as the main or essential purpose of this part of the business but as

incidents in the maintenance for war purposes of an essential part of the munitions branch of the defence arm.
How much more significant is the maintenance of a factory engaged in the manufacture of heavy ordnance? At any time in the history of conservative governments at this Federal level they could have, had they been concerned, established a policy that would have enabled a factory, such as the Ordnance Factory, to be maintained at the level that I indicated. Conservative governments have been in office for 30 years out of the last 33 years. In a provincial city such as Bendigo such a policy would have been crucial to the maintenance of jobs and the economic welfare of that community.
While the situation in Bendigo is of particular significance, given the Government's crude attempts to sell off people's assets to its friends, the failure of the Government to articulate an adequate manpower policy is placing the future of other rural and provincial areas in similar jeopardy. The Government has relied upon the concurrence of market forces both nationally and internationally and the beneficence of climatic conditions to see the country through. Hence when difficult times arise the chickens come home to roost. In the country these chickens show all the signs of neglect. I represent a provincial electorate. In each of the four areas depending upon manufacturing industry-namely, Ballarat, Maryborough, Kyneton and Daylesforddependence upon positive government initiatives is crucial to their future.
The central highlands region of Victoria is the area second most dependent upon tariff protection for manufacturing industry. Each of these centres has a number of industries that are extremely important for maintaining jobs and ensuring a flow of cash into the community. According to the last released figures from the Commonwealth Employment Service, in 1981 Ballarat had approximately 9.5 per cent of its work force registered for work. Since then, though repeated representations have been made to have these figures released, we have no current data to enable local planning to take place. That is a disgrace. The same situation occurs throughout rural and provincial Australia. The Government does not care about rural and provincial Australia. Therefore it is necessary to infer from data gained from the Department of Social Security the gross picture of unemployment in these areas. In June 1981 in the Ballarat region there were 2,139 unemployment benefit recipients. By June 1982 the figure had risen to 2,80 I-an increase of 662 poor souls who have been cast adrift by this Government. That is an increase of 30.9 per cent in a 12-month period. The Government has not given any indication of

814 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Employment Opportunities in Australia

concern for these people. We do not know the breakdown of unemployment in the region according to sex and age. Likewise, we have no
breakdown according to occupation. It would be interesting to find whether unemployment benefits correspond with the actual registered figure for the unemployed. If they do, the figure would go up from 3,315 to 4,641-an increase of 40.3 per cent. It is disgusting! We know that there is an upsurge of concern from welfare agencies in finding the capacity to cope with the demands on their services and in spreading the available resources far beyond their limit.
The picture I am painting is not just confined in its applicability to Ballarat and its regions. It is relevant to rural and provincial Australia generally. When the Government assumes in its Budget that there will be no growth in output and, to all intents and purposes, no productivity growth it is admitting that employment will deteriorate and that the ranks of the unemployed will be swollen once again. We can expect a further fall in employment throughout the nation of at least 65,000 during 1982-83. Mr Deputy Speaker, as you would know, many of these people will be in provincial and rural Australia. By the second half of 1982-83 we will be looking at unemployment rates nationally of between 8 per cent and 10 per cent. This means a depressed army of unemployed in excess of 600,000 people. Without an unemployment policy how can this nation possibly cope with the social and economic catastrophe that is in our midst today?
In rural and provincial areas the impact will be greater still. In cities such as Portland, Townsville, Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo the buffers for these people just do not exist. We require programs for employment. The recently
appointed mayor of Ballarat, Councillor Don Woodward, referred to local government's responsibility to create employment. How much more important is it for the Federal Government to have a job creation program? It is rather ironic that whilst there is a vast army of unemployed there are areas of employment where specialised personnel are required. Had the Government been concerned to create jobs it would have created the necessary machinery to do so. It is a fact that there is a shortage of workers with the necessary skills to use some of the most modern farm machinery. There is also a shortage of shearers. Again, oddly enough, if the country only had the number of shearers indicated by the figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics it would take two years to shear the flock. In other words, the Government is not even concerned to have adequate figures on which to plan.

There are many areas in which job opportunities could be created in rural areas if the Government were concerned to do so. Let us take an example which will be of concern to Tasmanians. There is much scope for increased jobs in the fishing industry if the Government were concerned to see that Australia exploited its 200-mile zone rather than give it to foreign interests. The Government has made much of the training programs that it has developed. Oddly, there is a lot of double talk about those programs. While the amount of money allocated for manpower and training programs increased in 1981-82 by 21 per cent this actually represented a fall of 38 per cent in real terms over the level of expenditure on manpower and training programs in 1975-76. So much for the Government's great concern. In that time unemployment has increased by at least 50 per cent. There are grave problems in these training programs because they are not geared to job creation. The Government cannot countenance any government becoming involved in job creation. Under the Special Youth Employment Training Program only 12 per cent of the subsidised positions represented additional positions.
Whilst I applaud the dedication of people in my electorate of Ballarat who have conscientiously worked to try to make these programs succeed there are problems for rural and provincial areas that must be addressed by the Government if jobs are to be gained by those young people at the end of their training. I am appalled, as are my colleagues and the people of this country, by the lack of Government policy, to protect jobs in rural and provincial Australia; the Government should demand that adequate policies also be developed to ensure that jobs are created in those areas for all those who want them.
MrCHAPMAN (Kingston) (3.21)-The matter of public importance proposed by the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) this afternoon states:
The Government's failure to protect existing employment and promote new employment opportunities in rural and provincial Australia.
This is nothing more than a fraud. As I have just indicated, this matter of public importance refers to rural and provincial Australia. All that we have heard from the honourable member for Ballarat is a few parochial comments about his own electorate of Ballarat and the neighbouring electorate of Bendigo. We have heard very little about the broad expanse of rural and provincial Australia. I remind the honourable member that, even in that parochial sense, he grossly misrepresented and launched a cheap personal attack on the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier) who

Employment Opportunities in Australia

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 815

has served his electorate, and indeed this nation, very effectively for the last 10 years. As far as the protection of jobs even in that provincial area to which he referred is concerned the honourable member for Ballarat ought to be reminded that the Federal Government has recently established a contract worth $40m for the supply of howitzer guns to the Australian Army which will keep the Bendigo Ordnance Factory to which he referred in work until 1989. So much for his criticism of the Government with regard to the Bendigo Ordnance Factory.
The other factor which warrants some reference is the honourable member for Ballarat's repetition of the Australian Labor Party's unquestioning faith that increasing government intervention and government control is the panacea to all our problems. Over time that has been demonstrated to be a quite false faith. Let me return the debate to the particular matter of public importance that has been proposed, something which the honourable member for Ballarat failed to do. The first thing that the honourable member had to establish, and completely failed to do, was that unemployment in rural and provincial Australia was in a far worse situation than for Australia as a whole and, in particular, the capital cities. Of course the case is quite the contrary. The current national average for unemployment is 6.6 per cent. With the exception of rural New South Wales and rural Tasmania the other nonmetropolitan areas in Australia have unemployment rates significantly below that national average. That clearly gives the lie to the claim that unemployment is in a worse situation in provincial and rural Australia than it is in our capital cities.
I turn now to the particular problem of unemployment. We need to recognise that crucial to the prosperity of rural and provincial areas and, therefore, to employment prospects in those areas, is the health of the farming and mining industries. The honourable member for Ballarat completely ignored that aspect in his remarks here this afternoon.
Mr Bourchier-You would not expect the Labor Party to support primary industry.
Mr CHAPMAN-We would not expect the Labor Party to support primary industry. Its philosophy is totally opposed to it. The most significant aspect of this prosperity in comparison with other sectors of the economy, is that the mining and primary industries are export industries and therefore have to compete for the sale of their goods on world markets. Therefore, the mining and rural industries are directly affected

by our terms of trade. Quite simply, those industries cannot pass on the extra costs to which they are subjected by arbitrarily increasing prices. Indeed, in the current world economy, quite the reverse is the case. The prices of rural and mining commodities on world markets are falling quite significantly. Therefore the gross incomes of those industries in Australia are also falling significantly.
The other problem with regard to provincial and rural areas is the drought which is affecting wide areas of Australia, and the impact of that on the farming industry in particular is quite significant. Our farmers are a resilient lot and they have demonstrated over the years that they can cope with droughts and they can even cope with international marketing problems for fairly extended periods. But they can do that only if, during those periods, their cost structure does not seriously escalate. Any increase in the cost of inputs, whether those inputs be capital or labour, must be kept to a minimum if rural and mining industries are to survive in the current climate of international economic recession combined with the effects of drought.
The most effective contribution that the Government can make in that situation is to continue its fight against inflation. To the extent that it has been allowed to fight inflation which has been influenced by factors beyond its control, this Government has done so successfully over the last six or seven years. That has been achieved in particular by restraint on government spending and by control of the money supply. The extent to which inflation remains a problem is due to the rapid escalation of wage rates. Over a long period we have seen the level of wages increase well in excess of increases in productivity, and inflation is an inevitable consequence. More especially, over the last two years, average weekly earnings increased by about 17 per cent per year. Not only have we seen wages increase far in excess of productivity increases but also have wages increased far in excess of the rate of inflation. That has the consequence offulther fuelling inflation.
As well as this indirect detrimental impact on rural industry through its effect on inflation, the escalation of wages also has a direct impact on the cost structure of rural and mining industries. Market forces apply on world markets to the products of farming and mining industries. Unless market forces also apply to the wage rates paid in those industries, those market forces will affect the employment levels of those industries. That is to say, if the influence of international market forces is not reflected in the wages structure in the farming and mining industries, which have suffered the

816 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Employment Opportunities in Australia

effects of those forces on their returns, that influence will, quite simply, be reflected in the employment structure; in other words, unemployment
will result.
The Federal Government is not responsible for
the international economic recession and falling commodity prices on international markets. The Federal Government is not responsible for the drought which is gripping Australia and threatening farm outputs. Nor is the Federal Government responsible for the rapid escalation of wages which has flowed through the economy, including the farming and mining sectors. Indeed, the Government has argued strongly against it and sought wage restraint. It is therefore absolute nonsense to charge the Government with the failure to protect existing employment opportunities and promote new employment opportunities in rural and provincial Australia. Of the three factors I mentioned in relation to this problem, the wage structure is the only aspect which domestically we can do anything about.
Rural workers had a wage structure foisted upon them by their industrial representatives in the union movement, which cannot be sustained in the light of those two other factors, that is, the international market recession and the widespread drought. Quite simply, if the gross domestic product in general is falling and rural and mining income is falling even more significantly, employment will not be maintained if wages continue to increase. In contrast with past experience, some trade unions, I notice now, are recognising this factor. The Australian Workers Union has sought to share in the metal industry round of wage negotiations and benefits. It has supported this effort in the recent past by industrial action. However, the hours side of this claim has not been pressed over recent months; and that is to some extent a recognition of the declining rural situation and the declining capacity of rural industry to afford those extra benefits. I welcome that recognition on the part of the Australian Workers Union, particularly in relation to pastoral workers. I urge other industrial organisations to follow the lead that it has given. Furthermore, if the concern of the Labor Party about employment opportunities in rural and provincial Australia is genuine, surely it also ought to be arguing for market forces to apply more specifically to wage rates in rural areas so that employment opportunities can be maintained in those areas.
The other aspect of importance to rural and provincial areas and the farming and mining industries that produce the bulk of the wealth from those areas and, therefore provide employment opportunities, is the cost of capital inputs. More

particularly, that relates to machinery, buildings, fences and other items. Of course, if the costs of these capital inputs are lower those industries have a greater capacity to provide jobs. A major factor in the cost of these items to rural and mining industries is the excessive protection given to some areas of secondary industry, whether by tariff or quota protection. This protection costs consumers throughout Australia about $6,OOOm per year. Some of that cost is borne by the economically efficient manufacturing industries, but the great bulk of the cost of that protection is borne by the rural and mining industries. That $6,OOOm cost of protection is severly detrimental
to the capacity of those industries to provide employment opportunities in rural and provincial Australia.
An input of basic importance to these industries is steel. It is used directly in those industries and, of course, as a raw material for machinery and other equipment. The utter hypocrisy of the Labor Party lies in its real lack of concern about employment in rural and provincial centres, and especially in those sectors of industry that provide the jobs in those areas. That lack of concern is clearly demonstrated by its support for increased protection for the steel industry and its support
for the plea of the Broken Hill Propriety Co. Ltd for increased protection.
On 6 July, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the honourable member for Kingsford Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), advocated greater protection for the Australian steel industry. He thereby advocated increased costs for the rural and mining industries and in turn, advocated a reduction in the employment capacity of those industries. The attitude of the industrial wing and the political wing of the Labor movement to two of the key issues affecting the prosperity of rural and mining industries in the current climate and hence to their capacity to provide jobs-namely, the wages structure and the protection of manufactured inputs-demonstrates the proposal of this matter of public importance for discussion to be a total sham; and, of course, it should be rejected as such.
In contrast, the Government has demonstrated its concern for employment in these areas. It has once again enhanced its job training programs and particularly emphasised the importance of those programs in rural and provincial areas. Indeed, if we look at the provision of various training programs in rural areas, we find, for example, under the school to work transition scheme that some 39.6 per cent of programs are provided in non-metropolitan areas, a provision far in excess of the population of those areas. The proportion

Employment Opportunities in Australia

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 817

of trainees-34.7 per cent-once again demostrates the Government's recognition of the importance of providing support in this way in rural areas. The Community Youth Support Scheme is another very important program that provides support to young unemployed people. Fortyseven per cent of all grants approved are for nonmetropolitan areas and some $7m of the funds provided for the Community Youth Support Scheme also go to non-metropolitan areas compared with some $9m for metropolitan areas. The Government's concern for employment prospects in those areas is clearly demonstrated by those programs.
Basically, the problem of unemployment gets back to our cost structure. Unless we develop a wages structure which is rational and which recognises the capacity of these industries to produce and obtain a return for what they produce on world markets, quite simply unemployment will increase and job opportunities will not be created. As I said at the outset, the Government clearly recognises that this is a crucial part of the problem. For six or seven years it has argued for wage restraint. It has given an even more positive lead in that regard in the last two or three months. We have not heard anything from the Labor Party about the need for wage restraint and, more especially, for relating wages specifically to productivity. As I said a few moments ago, until we hear that from the Opposition, matters of public importance such as that which has been raised today by the honourable member for Ballarat are nothing more than a fraud and a sham.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (3.36)-There could be no more important matter for discussion in this House today than that of the Government's failure to protect and provide jobs in rural and provincial Australia. The honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) might not like to be reminded that it was the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of the Government which he supports who said to the people of Australia that only under a Liberal Government will there be jobs for all those who want to work and that it was the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) of the same Government who, on the 12th of this month, said to the people, in effect, 'forget it'. That Minister, in his Press release of that day, said:
The severity of the labour market difficulties facing Australian is evident from the unemployment figures for July 1982 which were released today by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. When account is taken of seasonal influences, there was a further rise in unemployment in July. This confirms other evidence that the overall demand for labour is at a low level.

As the shadow Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations-the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke)-has so tellingly pointed out on so many occasions, the true situation is far worse than this bland admission from this bland Minister. Employment growth has now collapsed completely. Consequently unemployment has risen sharply, at a frightening rate, with people of all ages and in all localities across the country being affected. The impact of the Government's failure is hurting most in provincial and rural Australia. As the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) said during his speech, the precise local figures on registered unemployed are now unobtainable. The Government saw to that in April of last year when the razor gang recommended that the collection of figures by local Commonwealth Employment Service offices be dropped. It was a neat solution to a sticky political problem. When one has broken one's promises on jobs and the unemployment problem is getting out of hand, hide the figures. That is the one area where this deceitful Government can always be counted on. When the going sets tough it will run away and hide every time.
The local unemployment figures have proved no exception to the Government's consistent refusal to face up to the consequences of its disastrous policies. Nevertheless in various ways some figures will always surface. I have obtained regional figures for the city of Penrith, a centre which I represent and which is on the outskirts of Sydney. I must admit that the figures are third hand but that is the way these figures come out these days. If the version that I have been given is correct, it shows a frightening pattern. It shows an increase for Penrith of 36 per cent in registrations from June 1981 to June 1982-from 1,311 to 1,784.
Across the country in a mid-year period, at a time when unemployment ought to have fallen, it has climbed at an alarming rate. At a time when the graph should have dipped, it has taken off at a large and consistent angle of elevation. One can obtain some idea at least of the extent of unemployment in rural and provincial centres from the monthly totals of people receiving unemployment benefit from the district offices of the Department of Social Security. I shall present some statistics from an office serving part of my electorate and two others nearby in central western New South Wales:At the end of July 1982, 1,661 people were receiving unemployment benefit through the Lithgow office of the Department of Social Security. That figure represents an increase of 25 per cent over the May 1981 figure. In Bathurst 697 people were receiving unemployment benefit, an

818 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Employment Opportunities in Australia

increase of 20 per cent over May 1981. In Orange 3,912 people were receiving unemployment benefit, an increase of 19 per cent over the May figure for the previous year. I stress that these figures represent just the beneficiaries, not the total unemployed or the registrations. The totals do not include the numbers swelling the ranks of the hidden unemployed, those people who have given up the struggle of looking for non-existent jobs in these country centres.
When we talk merely in terms of figures we run the terrible risk of forgetting that we are talking about people, not just statistics. They are real people, people with commitments, people with hopes, often people with families who naturally have a desire to see their children get on in the world. They are young school leavers who are
eager to work but are faced with the prospect of having to get out of town because there is nothing there for them. They are people who are looking for jobs that do not exist because of the policies of this Government. They are people who are thrown out of work by the miserable policies of this miserable Government. We have all met them or their representatives at our electorate offices. What does one tell an unemployed person when he or she comes to one's electorate office looking for help? I wish the Minister were in the House to give me an answer because I have not been given one. He cannot give me one because he is not here, but I suspect I will not have an answer as long as this contemptible Government remains in office. What do I tell the next wave of school leavers when they come on to the job scene at the end of the year? What do I say to the local officers of the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations who are doing an excellent job in an impossible employment situation? How about some answers from this Government for a change?
I well remember the despair of men who were sacked when a cement works closed some years ago in the Kandos district of New South Wales. Those sackings meant a huge loss to the district. Over 80 wage packets went straight out of the local economy. But more than that were the problems that they faced and the problems facing many more in rural and provincial Australia because those problems are in many ways different from the problems facing people out of work in the cities. I am not saying that people unemployed in the cities do not have enormous problems, they certainly do. But at least they are part of a larger job market and have public transport systems available to them to help them explore that market. This is not so for someone who is out of work in the country. In many cases, especially in smaller centres, those people have to get out of

town. An unemployed person in such a situation may have to leave a town and a community which have provided the sum total of his social and personal contacts. He may have to leave a town where his children are happily settled in at a school. Hardest of all, he may have to try to sell a home which represents the major family investment and the fruit of years of work. It is especially hard in small centres, for who would possibly want to buy a home in a small town which has just lost a major local industry, perhaps its only local industry?
Let us look briefly at some case studies of local industries in the centres I have mentioned. Until early in July of this year, Robin's Shoe Factory in Bathurst employed over 100 people. In July 60 of those 100 people were dismissed, a result I believe of this Government's policy on footwear imports. On the growth side, just to demonstrate how rare and yet how feeble are the instances of job growth under this Government, honourable members will remember that the Email factory at Bankstown in Sydney closed recently with the loss of 300 jobs, the aim being to consolidate the industry at Orange. I have been told that this consolidation will result in a mere 30 additional jobs in Orange-l 0 per cent of the jobs lost and 0.76 per cent of those already receiving benefit in Orange.
I also want to mention employment at the Lithgow Small Arms Factory. This factory, like the Bendigo Ordnance Factory referred to by my colleague the honourable member for Ballarat, is a government undertaking. It was started by a Labor government. Over the years its work force has declined and this concerns me especially because people from my district travel to work at that factory. From 1970 to 1981 the factory's work force declined by over 35 per cent-from 1,525 to 988. In May of this year the staff was told that 60 jobs would go at the end of the month because orders expected from the Department of Defence had not arrived. Union representatives from that factory contacted me on 4 May. I asked them to form a delegation to come to Canberra. I was told that they had also contacted the honourable members for Calare (Mr MacKenzie). They were advised that he would not be able to meet them until June-after the date of the dismissals-and that he did not think it would be a good idea for them to come to Canberra. Neverthless, they did come. They met, of course, with members of the Australian Labor Party, including shadow Ministers. But they were surprised to find also that a meeting had been arranged by the honourable member for Calare with

Employment Opportunities in Australia

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 819

the Minister. As a result of that meeting, a statement was issued. It said that the orders would arrive after all, that there would be no retrenchments but that during the year 60 jobs would still go by attrition. Furthermore, the Minister indicated that he could give no guarantees beyond May 1982. Those are ominous words indeed. But at least those dismissals were averted through, I believe, pressure from the Labor Party and its excellent candidate in Calare, Alderman David Simmons. This example is an illustration of what a government can do if it is put under pressure. That kind of action from a government that really cares can do an enormous amount to assist people in the country. Through its own industries, through selective stimuli a government can do a great deal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (3.46)-The first point I make is that this is a very difficult economic period for everybody in Australia whether he happens to be in metropolitan or non-metropolitan areas. The second point is-I think it is the fundamental point of this debate-that the Australian Labor Party Opposition has failed to establish the necessary premise that unemployment is higher in rural and regional areas than it is in the capital cities. The Labor Party, by its failure to establish that, has effectively demolished the point about the failure of the Government in its promotion and maintainance of employment opportunities in rural and regional areas. If one looks at the latest figures in relation to the labour market which have been provided by the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations-the point made by the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) was very clear on this-for the States of South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania one will see that unemployment is higher in the metropolitan areas than it is in the non-metropolitan areas. In Victoria it is the same in metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas. Generally speaking, throughout Australia other regional areas had unemployment rates below the national average of 6.6 per cent. That destroys the Labor Party's basic argument that the Government has somehow or other failed in rural and regional areas.
One can look at the proposals put up by the two Opposition speakers. The honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) seemed to be of the view that somehow or other we could just have a short term policy, that we could first turn on something like job creation and that would solve our problems.

Mr Bourchier-Tell us about the RED scheme.
Mr LLOYD-As the honourable member for Bendigo reminds us all, it was the previous Labor Government which ended the Regional Employment Development Scheme because it was not seen as being a success as it was too expensive. It completely ignored the point that Labor governments and politicians ignore all the time-that we have to have long term policies if we are to create development and employment in these areas. All their long term policies are anti-development and anti-employment in rural and regional areas in Australia.
Mr Milton-Absolute nonsense.
Mr LLOYD-If the honourable member would like to sit here and listen for a moment I will go into some detail on this matter. I will just speak on the subject of the honourable member for Ballarat for a moment. He was here today criticising this Federal Government. What about the Government in his own State of Victoria? At the present time the McCain Aust Pty Ltd factory in Ballarat is threatening to move to Tasmania because of lack of assistance from a Victorian Labor Government. This same Victorian Labor Government is threatening to wipe out payroll tax incentives for decentralised industries in Victoria, completely altering the whole of the policies of the charges of the State Electricity Commission of Victoria which were built up over many years. It will now penalise people who use electricity in country and regional parts of Victoria. So much for the rhetoric, so much for the action that is taking place under a Labor government in Victoria at the present time.
Let us have a look at what the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free) had to say. The honourable member for Macquarie based his argument on the failure of this Government to face up to the disastrous consequences of its economic policy. What a cheek for anybody on the Labor side to mention economic policy in relation to employment levels and international competitiveness in this country. Let us have a look at those Labor policies. They are inflationary, big government expenditure, very high protection policies. They, are anti-rural, anti-development and antiinternational trade. They are all of the things which are opposite to what is needed for rural and regional employment in this country.
Let us get back to something sensible in this debate, that is, if we are to have employment in rural and regional areas we have to have long term policies based on that which will create employment in those areas. First of all we must deal with the

820 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Employment Opportunities in Australia

agricultural industries that are there. Flowing through from that we need a system for the processing of those agricultural products. Next to that we need to provide for the mining industries that are in rural and regional areas. Beyond that we need to provide special forms of assistance to encourage those industries to develop and to encourage people to go to them. They have to be long term. Confidence has to be built up. Industries have to be built on the basis of internationally competitive trade. There has to be some encouragement for investors, both within Australia and outside, to come and invest. Let us look at the Labor Party in relation to agricultural policy. How much support has it given for any of the stabilisation or underwriting schemes that are necessary for long term projections, long term investment in rural industry?
Mr Mildren~ The floor price for wool.
Mr LLOYD~ We introduced the floor price. I very clearly remember being in this Parliament in 1973 and 1974 when the Labor Cabinet was trying to reduce the floor price for wool, a price that had been introduced by us several years earlier. What support has the Labor Party given for the new depreciation allowance or for the investment allowance? The Labor Party took away the superphosphate and nitrogenous fertiliser bounties. It messed this around again in the Senate the other day. It removed the fuel freight subsidy equalisation scheme. It reduced the rural telephone concessions. It halved in one year the money going toward rural roads in this country. What a mockery to have Labor Party members here today talking about this Government not assisting rural and regional employment. When the Labor Party was in government~that is the test~~
Mr Bourchier~ They have the same policies now.
Mr LLOYD~ Those policies have not changed. People should always remember on the one hand what the Labor Party says in its rhetoric and on the other hand what it does. The honourable member for Bendigo has made the point that we should first look at the State Labor Government in Victoria at the present time. If one looks at the special assistance that is being made in this Budget to assist in these areas one can indicate and show the special concern of this Government. What about mining? Golly, oil exploration almost ceased in this country during the period of the Labor Government. There was so much uncertainty and confusion about the Connor proposals for investment in this country. Since 1976 the employment potential of the mining industry

in this country~nearly all of it in rural and regional areas~has been phenomenal. We have worked very hard also on the necessary international trade policies. I always remember the Labor Government and 1974 when the Japanese Government shut the door on any beef exports from Australia. There was not one whimper from the Labor Government at that time to maintain our trade with that country. Fortunately, with ourselves back in government and good relations with the Government of Japan we now have quite a trade going again.
We can look at the other things that we are
doing as a government. We have established a special processing committee with the Japanese Government to encourage more processing of primary products in this country. The honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) whom Opposition members mentioned a moment ago, has provided considerable assistance in the development of wool scouring in regional areas of this country providing more employment in rural and regional areas. We can come to the matter of food processing. There is a natural movement of food processing out of capital cities to regional cities
because of the environmental protection problems in our major cities. We have had tremendous movement~certainly in my electorate~towards
food processing in regional towns. I say to the Labor Opposition: The people who work in those food processing industries are their own worst enemies with regard to their future employment because of the way they are pricing our processed foods out of the international market and are forcing people to stay in business to sell their commodities raw overseas rather than processed.
I spent some time during the recess looking at the prawn fishing industry in northern Australia. There has been a tremendous movement in the export of what is known as bulk packed prawns to other countries, particularly Japan, as distinct from fully processed prawns with the resultant loss of hundreds and hundreds of people in the prawn processing industry because the cost of labour in this country is too high. The cost of a woman working in a fruit cannery in the Goulburn Valley is twice what it is in California. Yet somehow or other we are expected to compete. Thousands of jobs have been lost in the abattoir industry of Australia. Yet the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union is on strike in Victoria for $65 a week extra~at a time when that industry has already lost thousands of employees whose own actions have significantly encouraged that to happen. Yet members of that union are doing this. It is so suicidal.
Mr Bourchier~Backed up by the ALP.

Petitions

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 821

Mr LLOYD-They are their own worst enemies. As the honourable member for Bendigo has said, they are given every encouragement by the Labor Party. The Labor Party will destroy employment opportunities in rural and regional Australia.
Finally, without going through all the other factors, including tourism, which this Government has boosted and which is now quite significant in country areas, I say that industry in rural and regional Australia is basically export or import replacement oriented. To survive it must be internationally competitive. The policies of the Labor Government are the opposite to international competitiveness, as they were shown to be when in practice during the term of the Labor Government in the mid-l 970s.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Taxation
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that whereas the current rates of personal income tax are onerous and destructive of personal incentive, particularly since the cessation of income tax indexation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formerly call upon the Parliament assembled to legislate such changes to the current taxation law as will-
raise the minimum level at which income tax is first payable to at least $4,500.00,
proportionately increase the figures at which the higher rates of tax attract,
allow taxpayers to claim the full amount for each item within the Concessional Expenditure Rebate, and
adjust the rates of tax payable so that no higher rate of tax is payable than fifty percent of income earned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield, Mr Cadman, Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Sinclair.
Petitions received.
Excise on Wine
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
that any sales tax or excise on Australian wine would adversely affect employment in the wine industry, place a disproportionate burden on grapegrowers and ensure a larger future surplus of grapes;
the reduction in the demand for wine will also threaten the existence of many wine producers and reduce the range, quality and variety of wines offered in the market.

your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government will reject any proposal for a sales tax or excise on Australian wine;
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Baume, Mr Chapman and Mr Les Johnson.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The heart-rending loss of homes by home purchasers, due to an expanding holocaust of interest rates caused by, and to quote the manager of a leading bank (26.04.81) 'with the growing competition for savings, depositors are looking for higher interest returns on deposits. In order to retain our depositors and to meet the increased costs payable on deposits and operating expenses, it is necessary to raise income from loans of all types, including House Loans'.
Therefore it becomes transparently clear that the constant edging up of interest rates for investors by banks, lending institutions, and banking consortiums are collectively responsible for the monetary explosion, lack of employment and all that that entails and is causing grave social disruption to hundreds of thousands. Behind it all, the absence of control that is now politically essential in the interest of justice and fair distribution of burden.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your House urge all politicians to unite nationally to do all within their power to reduce interest rates across the board.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That high interest rates are ruinous to the economy and disastrous to home buyers.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government take positive action to reduce high interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Burr.
Petition received.
University ofQueensland
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
The students and staff of the University of Queensland express their dismay at the lack of adequate federal government funding to our University, which has resulted, interalia, in the erosion of our library facilities-we note that:
The opening hours of our main library have been reduced from 93t hours a week in 1975 to 72 hours a week in 1982.
The number of new books purchased per year has fallen from over 50,000 in 1976 to under 23,000 in 1981.

822 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Petitions

The number of books in storage and inaccessible to students and staff has risen from none in 1977 to over 40,000 in 1981.
The number of books discarded in 1976 was over 6,000 by the end of 1981 over 70,000 had been discarded.
We believe this to be educationally retrograde and economically wasteful.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that government funding levels be increased to a level sufficient to allow the University to restore our previous library facilities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representative in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
That we protest at breakdowns in our Restrictive Immigration policy which. many senior members of our parliament had vigorously supported in their past promises to the Australian people.
We urge the Government to accede, not only to the wishes of the majority, as expressed in all public opinion polls, but also to act in accordance with their own statements. For example:
I. "We want one Australian people, one Australian Nation." --Mr McMahon.
2. "The avoidance of difficult social problems following an influx of people having different standards of living. "-ALP policy 72.
3. "I believe we should do all in our power to prevent the build up of ethnic groups within Australia."- Mr MacKellar.
4. "Our policies reflect the firm and unshakeable determination of the Government to maintain a homogeneous society, a society that is essentially undivided and free of avoidable tensions." - Dr Forbes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton and Mr Keating.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Macphee and Mr Street.
Petitions received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education-- People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.

2. Undermind the Tertiary Education Assistance SchemeTEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38% of full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced
3. Disadvantage Women-Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students-Usually mature age students forego income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices-Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates-'Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to "drop-out" rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative & Financial DifficultiesOverseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disasterous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme. And your petitioners as in duty bound shall every humbly pray.
by Mr Wilson and Mr Young.
Petitions received.
Funding for Independent Schools in the Australian Capital Territory
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned on behalf of concerned citizens respectfully showeth:
"That it is important that there be freedom of choice in education in the Australian Capital Territory".
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Federal Government provides adequate funding for Independent Schools in the Australian Capital Territory and more particularly for the establishment of a third Grammar School in Canberra.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrBaume.
Petition received.
National Broadcasting Service Transmitters
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Federal Government decision for the Australian Broadcasting Commission and the Department of Communications to take over responsibility for the installation and maintenance of the National Broadcasting Service transmitters is contrary to the conclusion of the public enquiry into the A.B.C. by the Dix committee.

Petitions

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 823

Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Federal Government reverse its decision and allow the continuation of the present long standing arrangement whereby installation and maintenance of National Broadcasting Service transmitters is performed by Telecom Australia staff.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That as South West Tasmania is listed on the Register of the National Estate and is also of international importance as recognised by the I.U.C.N., we the undersigned, ask that your Government hold an open, expert and independent FederalState inquiry into the future land use in the "South West".
"Only by a Federal inquiry will national considerations and all the alternatives be fully examined". House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation reporting on South West Tasmania and Hydro Electric Development, August 1980.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFree.
Petition received
Down's Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The important wish of the people, to make possible the treatment of Down's Syndrome (Mongolism) children, to be treated in Australia by the Sicco-cell Therapy. This treatment is now available in Germany and many parents have undertaken the long and expensive tour to Germany. Nearly everyone involved in personal experience is enthusiastic about the results, however the Australian Health Authorities have not given permission to make this treatment available in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will give this important treatment your full attention, even if possible

on a trial basis. It would make it possible for every affected child to receive the treatment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Steele Hall.
Petition received.
Home Deposit Assistance Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(I) The restrictive income test of the Home Deposit Assistance Scheme penalises applicants who are forced by rising housing prices and high interest rates to become two-income families;
(2) the limit on the value of the house be reintroduced to ensure that the wealthy would not be eligible to apply for the grant;
(3) the interest rate tax rebate is too low and takes too long to recompense to be of any real value to low-income earners, who cannot afford the repayments of a high interest loan; and
(4) more people should be made eligible for the loan so that the building industry may be assisted out of its present slump.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House request the Government to take positive steps to stimulate the waning building industry and genuinely assist home buyers by raising, or abolishing, the income test, re-introducing a limit on the value of the house and increasing the tax rebate of the Home Deposit Assistance Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Telephone Services for Pensioners
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the indiscriminate denial of the telephone rental concession to pensioners who share accommodation with others whose weekly income is greater than $104.15 is causing many needy pensioners unnecessary hardship.
The vast majority of pensioners who share accommodation do so out of necessity, i.e. to help in defraying household expenses or to provide a home for their children. They do not derive significant financial gain through sharing accommodation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will devise a Household Income Test which will reflect the true financial position of such pensioners and will direct Telecom Australia to extend the telephone rental concession to all pensioners not deriving significant financial gains through sharing accommodation with others.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

824 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Petitions

That (a) the export of live animals for slaughter overseas and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Hounourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
( I) That Moreton Island has been listed on the Register of the National Estate because of its exceptional scientific, ecological, heritage and recreational values; and
(2) That any sand mining of Moreton Island will result in the destruction of the exceptional scientific, ecological, heritage and recreational values of the Island; and
(3) That Moreton Island has been the subject of detailed investigation resulting in the adoption of a Management Plan by the Brisbane City Council the main aims of which are to conserve in its natural state the quality of its scenery and natural environment and to enhance public enjoyment of it for recreation purposes; and
(4) That Moreton Island represents the last significant area of wilderness close to Brisbane; and
(5) That there is an acute deficiency of National Parks within a 150 kilometre radius of Brisbane; and
(6) That Moreton Island contains Aboriginal Relics of immense scientific and cultural importance; and
(7) That the Island represents a major potential tourist resource specifically because of its unspoiled natural scenic attractions; and
(8) That public opinion actively demostrated over a number of years clearly indicates that most citizens of Brisbane are strongly opposed to any sand mining on the Island, and desire that the whole of Moreton Island with the exception only of existing Townships, Tourist Resort, Airstrips and Lighthouse Reserve should be declared a National Park.
Your Petitioners, therefore, Humbly Pray that the Parliament of Australia will: (a) accept the wishes of the Petitioners and the citizens of Brisbane generally and take whatever action is necessary and available to it to prevent sand mining of any description taking place on Moreton Island; and (b) request the Government of the State of Queensland to take immediate action to declare the whole of Moreton Island to be a National Park with the exception only of existing Townships, Tourist Resort, Airstrips and Lighthouse Reserve.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and

2. the Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling,
3. then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific rsearch for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require (a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and (b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Office of Child Care
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That citizens of South Australia view with great alarm the removal of the Director of the Office of Child Care and fear for the future of that office and the children's services programme which it administers.
We believe the Office of Child Care to be inappropriately placed within the Department of Social Security, where children's services are in competition with welfare services for the aged, disabled, and other such groups.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should take every step as necessary to obtain immediate withdrawal of the Office of Child Care from the Department of Social Security and the establishment of a Children's Commission.

Petitions

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 825

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter.
Petition received.
Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian Government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980;
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantage in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants, loans, credit or finance;
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by (i) making unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the ground of sex and marital status and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Marital Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Government Aid Projects to the Philippines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned Australian taxpayers and citizens oppose the present Government aid to the Philippines (80 per cent of funds are for road construction in Northern Samar and Zamboanga Del Sur).
Recent reports released by 'Community Aid Abroad' and 'Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace' indicate that these roads are having no impact on poverty and are helping military oppression.
Your petitioners most humbly pray:
That these Government aid projects be stopped.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Street.
Petition received.
Westernport Youth Refuge, Victoria
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned about the possible closure of the Westernport Youth Refuge because of inadequate funds made available under the Youth Accommodation Services Program (a joint Department of Community Welfare Services and Department of Social Security program).
Over a 12 month period more than 500 young people have been assisted by the refuge. If it is forced to close then many homeless young people in the Westernport Region will be left without any assistance at all.

Your petitioners, in duty bound, humbly pray that additional funds be provided under the Youth Accommodation Services Program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will every pray.
by MrUren.
Petition received.
National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrUren.
Petition received.
Youth Accommodation Services Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia showeth that whereas a pilot program of emergency accommodation for young people ends in June 1982, many young people continue to be at risk in our local communities through lack of adequate housing and support.
We therefore pray that funds be made available to continue and extend the services available through the Youth Accommodation Services Programme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrUren.
Petition received.
Government Spending
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are deeply concerned at:
I. development of nuclear and atomic weapons; and
2. purchase of the "Invincible" ship and other weapons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that such moneys be spent on better uses such as educational, health and welfare services.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrUren.
Petition received.

826 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Petitions

Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of McArthur respectfully showeth-the old age pension is granted, according to the Constitution of the Land, Federal Parliament, and the people, conditionally to all citizens, who were Non-serving persons in the Forces, on reaching 65 years of age.
We of the Defence Forces, past and present, are entitled to the above mentioned Pension five years earlier, i.e. at 60 years of age.
An Unconditional Pension is granted to people who did not risk their life and limbs at any war.
We wish to ask the Minister for Veteran's Affairs, WHY, we ex Defence Forces are not entitled to a NO MEANS TEST at 65 years of age?
This means that a non serving Citizen, on retirement at 65 years of age, only has to wait 5 years to be free of the Means Test, as against the veterans waiting 10 years for the same privilege.
Those people who are interested, regarding this matter, and wish to draw this subject to our present Federal Government's attention, please sign below.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you, our Honourable Member, will bring this matter to the Minister for Veterans Affairs attention and your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
Proserpine Post Office, Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Dawson Electorate of North Queensland respectfully showeth-
that Post Offices are the responsibility of the Federal Government,
the Proserpine Post Office has inadequate access for a large number of the community,
Mothers with prams, babes in arms and toddlers, invalid and old age pensioners, and paraplegics, are further incapacitated by the steep gradient of the Post Office steps.
Your petitioners humbly pray that Parliament will allocate sufficient funds to allow tenders to be called for the design and erection of a ramp in a suitable place adjacent to the Post Office for the unlimited access by the Proserpine community and its visitors, within the next 12 months.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Great Northern Highway, Kimberley Region
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.We the undersigned residents of the Kimberley humbly petition the House of Representatives to urgently allocate funds for the immediate upgrading of the Great Northern Highway in the Kimberley to an all weather sealed highway and pray that the following matters might be considered in relation thereto:
(a) The grave hardship caused to the many residents of the Kimberley due to the Great Northern Highway annually being impassable by road transport resulting in the towns of Kununurra, Wyndham, Halls Creek and Fitzroy Crossing and

the community of Turkey Creek being without adequate food supplies for periods of sometimes in excess of one month.
(b) That this portion of the Great Northern Highway is the last portion which is unsealed and which does not provide an all weather link and we are, therefore, the only residents of Australia who are on a major highway system which is regularly inundated.
(c) Current allocations and plans do not provide for the upgradiQg of this highway to be completed in under six years.
(d) There is great defence and strategic importance in having an all weather highway system into the North of Western Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Pensions of Italian Immigrants
To the Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled.
The petition of the undersigned residents of Australia respectfully showeth: That the Australian Government take urgent. steps to formulate and approve a Social Security Agreement with the Italian Government based on the rights and the needs of Italian immigrant workers in Australia.
Moreover, with the present petition we request that the following important question related to the pensions of Italian immigrants be urgently resolved within such an agreement; in particular we request:
I. That Italian Immigrants who have gained the right to Australian pensions and are no longer resident in Australia be given the opportunity to apply for and obtain the pension without having to return to Australia.
2. That periods of residence in Australia of less than ten years presently required by the Australian legislation be considered for some entitlement to the Australian pension.
3. That the issue concerning the unfair reduction applied to the pension of Australian residents who are receiving an Italian pension be resolved.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.3)-1 move:
Excise Tariff Proposals No.3 (1982) and Customs Tariff (Coal Export Duty) Proposals (1982).
Excise Tariff Proposals No. 3 (1982) and Customs Tariff (Coal Export Duty) Proposals (1982) which I have just tabled formally place before Parliament alterations to the Excise Tariff Act 1921 and the Customs Tariff (Coal Export Duty) Act 1975 respectively. These alterations were introduced during the winter recess by Commonwealth of Australia Gazette excise notice No. 1 (1982) under the authority of section 160B of the Excise Act and Gazette notice No.1 (1982)

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 827

under the authority of section 273EA of the Customs Act. Excise Tariff Proposals No. 3 (1982) increases the excise duty on stabilised crude petroleum oil from $186.26 to $205.97 per kilolitre operating on and from 1 July 1982. This alteration followed determination of new import parity prices by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Sir John Carrick). The determination accords with Government policy on import parity pricing for Australian produced crude oil.
In addition, Excise Tariff Proposals No. 3 (1982) increases the excise duty on naturally occurring liquefied petroleum gas from $20.46 to $25.93 per kilolitre operating on and from I July 1982. This change followed a new average wholesale price for naturally occurring LPG being set by the Minister for National Development and Energy in accordance with Government policy. Customs Tariff (Coal Export Duty) Proposals (1982), operating on and from 29 July 1982, exempts from duty all black coal previously dutiable at $1.00 per tonne. This alteration follows the Government's decision announced by the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) on 29 July 1982 to assist Australian coal exporters. I commend the proposals to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.
CUSTOMS AND EXCISE AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.5)-1 will not take long to conclude my remarks in respect of the legislation. I did, however, want to place on record once again my appreciation to the officers of the Bureau of Customs, which was within the old Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and is now within the ranks of the new, enlarged Department of Industry and Commerce, for the diligence with which they pursue their very difficult duties. As I indicated in my remarks the other evening before the debate was adjourned, I appreciate as a lawyer the difficulties under which the officers operate with the existing legislation but I assure all officers of the Department and those who deal with it that the process of comprehensively reviewing the provisions of the Act is a continuing process. As I indicated in introducing my remarks in respect of this Bill, the Bill itself is a very significant indication of the

manner in which the Government has responded to suggestions for change which have come from within the Department itself, from the ranks of the Customs officers and, indeed, from private enterprise.
I mention particularly the initiative which will be contained in one of the amendments to which I will refer in the Committee stage in relation to bringing under the purview of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal actions taken under section 40AA of the Act. I do not anticipate the debate but give that as an illustration of the Government's responding, after consultation with its advisers, to representations from the private sector. Honourable members will find in the Committee stage that the amendment is very significant. It may well relate to actions which could have a very significant effect on the continuation of the operation of a duty free shop outside an airport. Because this involves proprietary rights it will come under the purview of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
It remains for me only to thank honourable members for their contributions to the debate. I do not intend to go through all the comments raised on both sides of the House. I have already expressed gratitude both for the attitude of and manner in which the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) led in the debate on behalf of the Opposition and for the excellent contribution to the debate by my colleague, the honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards). With those concluding remarks and, again, congratulating the Customs officers on the excellent job they do in very difficult circumstances, I now commend the second reading of the Bill to the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.8)-by leaveWith the consent of my colleague leading for the Opposition, the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown), I will move all the amendments as a whole. This will prevent the necessity for me to make a short speech in relation to each amendment. They are in many ways related. I think it will suit the convenience of the House-the Opposition consents to this course-if we deal with them as a whole. I move:
(I) Clause 10, page 9, line 29, insert ", when required to do so by a Collector," after "shall".

828 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

(2) Clause 19, page 16, lines 14 to 23, omit proposed paragraphs (I A) (a) and (b), substitute the following paragraphs:
"(a) any conviction of the person of an offence against this Act committed-
(i) where the licence has not been renewed-after the grant of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-after the renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal; or
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-after the latest renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal;
"(b) any conviction of the person of an offence under a law of the Commonwealth, of a State or of a Territory that is punishable by imprisonment for a period of one year or longer, being an offence committed-
(i) where the licence has not been renewed-after the grant of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-after the renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal; or
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-after the latest renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal; or".
(3) Clause 19, page 16, lines 30 to 35, omit proposed subparagraphs (lB) (a) (i) and (ii), substitute the following sub-paragraphs:
"(i) where the licence has not been renewed-committed after the grant of the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-committed after the renewal of the licence;
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-committed after the latest renewal of the licence; or
(iv) committed-
(A) where the licence has not been renewed-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence;
(B) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal of the licence; or
(c) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal of the licence,
and at a time when a person who is a director, officer or shareholder of the company was a director, officer or shareholder of the company;".
(4) Clause 19, page 16, lines 39 to 44, omit proposed subparagraphs (IB) (b) (i) and (ii), substitute the following sub-paragraphs:
"(i) where the licence has not been renewed-committed after the grant of the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-committed after the renewal of the licence;
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-committed after the latest renewal of the licence; or

(iv) committed(A) where the licence has not been renewed-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence; (8) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal of the licence; and
(C) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal of the licence,
and at a time when a person who is a director, officer or shareholder of the company was a director, officer or shareholder of the company; or". (5) After clause 21, page 17, insert the following new clause: "2IA. After section 96 of the Principal Act the following section is inserted:
Duty free shops
'96A. (I) In this section"duty free shop" means a warehouse the warehouse licence
that relates to which authorizes the sale in the warehouse of goods to relevant travellers; "international flight" means a flight, whether direct or indirect, by an aircraft between a place in Australia from which the aircraft takes off and a place outside Australia at which the aircraft lands or is intended to land; "place outside Australia" does not include(a) a ship, or an area of waters, outside Australia; (b) an installation outside Australia; or (c) a reef, or an uninhabited island, outside Australia; "proprietor", in relation to a duty free shop, means the holder of the warehouse licence that relates to the duty free shop; "relevant traveller" means a person who intends to make an international flight, whether as a passenger on, or as the pilot or a member of the crew of, an aircraft. '(2) Subject to the regulations (if any), a Collector may give permission, in accordance with sub-section (3), for goods that are specified in the permission and are sold to a relevant traveller in a duty free shop that is specified in the permission to be(a) delivered to the relevant traveller personally for
export by him when making the international flight in relation to which he is a relevant traveller; and (b) exported by the relevant traveller when making that flight without the goods having been entered for export, and, subject to sub-section (13), the permission is authority for such goods to be so delivered and so exported. '(3) Permission under sub-section (2) is given in accordance with this sub-section if it is in writing and is delivered to the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates. '(4) Permission under sub-section (2) may relate to particular goods, all goods, goods included in a specified class or classes of goods or goods other than goods included in a specified class or classes of goods. '( 5) Without limiting the matters that may be prescribed in regulations referred to in sub-section (2), those regulations- (a) may prescribe circumstances in which permission under that sub-section may be given; (b) may prescribe matters to be taken into account by a Collector when deciding whether to give permission under that sub-section; and (c) may prescribe conditions to which a permission under that sub-section is to be subject. '(6) A Collector may, when giving permission under subsection (2) or at any time while a permission under that subsection is in force, impose conditions to which the permission is to be subject, being conditions that, in the opinion of the

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 829

Collector, are necessary for the protection of the revenue or for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the Customs Acts and may, at any time, revoke, suspend or vary, or cancel a suspension of, a condition so imposed.
'(7) Without limiting the generality of paragraph (5) (c) or sub-section (6), a condition referred to in that paragraph or that sub-section to which a permission is to be subject may be-
(a) a condition to be complied with by the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates or by relevant travellers to whom goods to which the permission relates are sold;
(b) a condition that the permission only applies to sales to relevant travellers who comply with a prescribed requirement or requirements, which may be, or include, a requirement that relevant travellers produce to the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates or to a servant or agent of that proprietor a ticket or other document, being a document approved by a Collector for the purposes of this paragraph, showing that the relevant traveller is entitled to make the international flight in relation to which he is a relevant traveller; or
(c) a condition that the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates will keep records specified in the regulations and will notify a Collector of all sales made by him to which the permission applies.
'(8) A condition imposed in respect of a permission under sub-section (6) or a revocation, suspension or variation, or a cancellation of a suspension, of such a condition takes effect when notice, in writing, of the condition or of the revocation, suspension or variation, or of the cancellation of the suspension, is served on the proprietor of the duty free shop to which it relates, or at such later time (if any) as is specified in the notice, but does not have effect in relation to any goods delivered to relevant traveller before the notice was served.
'(9) A condition imposed in respect of a permission under paragraph (5) (c) or sub-section (6) or a revocation, suspension or variation, or a cancellation of a suspension, of a condition under sub-section (6) may relate to all goods to which the permission relates or to particular goods to which the permission relates and may apply either generally or in particular circumstances.
'( 10) A permission under sub-section (2) is subject to-
(a) the condition that the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates will ensure that relevant travellers to whom goods are delivered in accordance with the permission are aware of any conditions of the permission with which they are required to comply; and
(b) the condition that that proprietor will provide a Collector with proof, in a prescribed way and within a prescribed time, of the export of goods delivered to a relevant traveller in accordance with the permission.
'( II) If a person who is required to comply with a condition imposed in respect of a permission under sub-section (2) fails to comply with the condition, he is guilty of an offence against this Act punishable upon conviction by a penalty not exceeding $5,000.
'( 12) Where the proprietor of a duty free shop to which a permission under sub-section (2) relates does not produce the proof required by paragraph (10) (b) that goods delivered by him to a relevant traveller in accordance with the permission have been exported by that traveller, the goods shall be deemed to have been entered, and delivered, for home consumption by the proprietor, as owner of the goods, on the day on which the goods were delivered to that traveller.
'(13) A Collector may, in accordance with the regulations, revoke a permission given under sub-section (2) in relation to the sale of goods occurring after the revocation. '.". (6) Clause 23, page 18, line I, omit "Warehoused", substitute
"Subject to section 96A, warehoused".

(7) Clause 23, page 18, line 3, omit "exportation", substitute "export".
(8) Clause 24, page 25, lines 30 to 37, omit proposed paragraphs III (2) (a) and (b), substitute the following paragraphs:
"(a) any conviction of the person of an offence against this Act committed-
(i) where the licence has not been renewed-after th egrant of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-after the renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal; or
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-after the latest renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal;
"(b) any conviction of the person of an offence under a law of the Commonwealth, of a State or of a Territory that is punishable by imprisonment for a period of one year or longer, being an offence committed-
(i) where the licence has not been renewed-after the grant of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-after the renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal; or
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-after the latest renewal of the licence or within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal; or".
(9) Clause 24, page 25, line 44 and page 26, lines I to 4, omit proposed sub-paragraphs III (3) (a) (i) and (ii), substitute the following sub-paragraphs:
"(i) where the licence has not been renewed-committed after the grant of the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-committed after the renewal of the licence;
(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-committed after the latest renewal of the licence; or
(iv) committed-
(A) where the licence has not been renewed-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence;
(8) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal of the licence; or
(C) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal of the licence,
and at a time when a person who is a director, officer or shareholder of the company was a director, officer or shareholder of the company;".
(10) Clause 24, page 26, lines 8 to 12, omit proposed subparagraphs III (3) (b) (i) and (ii), substitute the following sub-paragraphs:
"(i) where the licence has not been renewed-committed after the grant of the licence;
(ii) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-committed after the renewal of the licence;

830 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

(iii) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-committed after the latest renewal of the licence; or
(iv) committed(A) where the licence has not been renewed-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence; (8) where the licence has been renewed on one occasion only-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the renewal of the licence; and (C) where the licence has been renewed on more than one occasion-within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the latest renewal of the licence, and at a time when a person who is a director, officer or shareholder of the company was a director, officer or shareholder of the company; or".
( I I) Clause 24, page 28, lines 13 and 14, omit paragraph (4) (c), substitute the following paragraph: "(c) published, in each State and internal Territory, in a newspaper circulating generally in that State or Territory.".
(12) Clause 24, page 29, at the end of the proposed section III E add the following sub-section: "(2) Where a Collector (other than an officer of Customs
who is in uniform) proposes to enter a depot under subsection (I), he shall, if requested to do so by the holder of the depot licence for that depot, produce, for inspection by the holder, written evidence of the fact that he is an officer of Customs and, if he fails to do so, he is not authorized to enter the depot.". (13) Clause 28, page 30, line 39, insert "an" after "or". (14) Clause 40, page 34, lines 33 and 34, omit paragraph
(2) (b), substitute the following paragraph: "(b) each of those companies has a nominee at the place,
or each place, at which it is a customs agent. ". (15) After clause 72, page 43, insert the following new
clauses:
Authority for exportation of excisable goods to be given
"73. Section 58B of the Principal Act is amended by inserting 'section 61 Dand' after 'Subject to'.
"74. After section 61 c of the Principal Act the following section is inserted:
Duty free shops
'6ID. (I) In this section-
"duty free shop" means an approved place that is a warehouse and the warehouse licence that relates to which authorizes the sale in the warehouse of goods to relevant travellers;
"international flight" means a flight, whether direct or indirect, by an aircraft between a place in Australia from which the aircraft takes off and a place outside Australia which the aircraft lands or is intended to land;
"place outside Australia" does not include(a) a ship, or an area of waters, outside Australia; (b) an installation outside Australia; or (c) a reef, or an uninhabited island, outside Australia;
"proprietor", in relation to a duty free shop, means the proprietor of the approved place that is that duty free shop;
"relevant traveller" means a person who intends to make an international flight, whether as a passenger on, or as the pilot or a member of the crew of, an aircraft;
"warehouse licence" has the same meaning as it has in the Customs Acl1901.
'(2) Subject to the regulations (if any), a Collector may give permission, in accordance with sub-section (3), for excisable goods that are specified in the permission, are subjected

to the control of the Customs and are sold to a relevant traveller in a duty free shop that is specified in the permission to be-
(a) delivered to the relevant traveller personally for exportation by him when making the international flight in relation to which he is a relevant traveller; and
(b) exported by the relevant traveller when making that flight without the goods having been entered for exportation,
and, subject to sub-section (13), the permission is authority for such goods to be so delivered and so exported.
'(3) Permission under sub-section (2) is given in accordance with this sub-section if it is in writing and is delivered to the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates.
'(4) Permission under sub-section (2) may relate to particular goods, all goods, goods included in a specified class or classes of goods or goods other than goods included in a specified class or classes of goods.
'(5) Without limiting the matters that may be prescribed in regulations referred to in sub-section (2), those regulations-
(a) .may prescribe circumstances in which permission under that sub-section may be given;
(b) may prescribe matters to be taken into account by a Collector when deciding whether to give permission under that sub-section; and
(c) may prescribe conditions to which a permission under that sub-section is to be subject.
'(6) A Collector may, when giving permission under subsection (2) or at any time while a permission under that subsection is in force, impose conditions to which the permission is to be subject, being conditions that, in the opinion of the Collector, are necessary for the protection of the revenue or for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the Excise Acts and may, at any time, revoke, suspend or vary, or cancel a suspension of, a condition so imposed.
'(7) Without limiting the generality of paragraph (5) (c) or sub-section (6), a condition referred to in that paragraph or that sub-section to which a permission is to be subject may be--
(a) a condition to be complied with by the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates or by relevant travellers to whom goods to which the permission relates are sold;
(b) a condition that the permission only applies to sales to relevant travellers who comply with a prescribed requirement or requirements, which may be, or include, a requirement that relevant travellers produce to the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates or to a servant or agent of that proprietor a ticket or other document, being a document approved by a Collector for the purposes of this paragraph, showing that the relevant traveller is entitled to make the international flight in relation to which he is a relevant traveller; or
(c) a condition that the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates will keep records specified in the regulations and will notify a Collector of all sales made by him to which the permission applies.
'(8) A condition imposed in respect of a permission under sub-section (6) or a revocation, suspension or variation, or a cancellation of a suspension, of such a condition takes effect when notice, in writing, of the conditions or of the revocation, suspension or variation, or of the cancellation of the suspension, is served on the proprietor of the duty free shop to which it relates, or at such later time (if any) as is specified in the notice, but does not have effect in relation to any goods delivered to a relevant traveller before the notice was served.

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 831

'(9) A condition imposed in respect of a permission under paragraph (5) (c) or sub-section (6) or a revocation, suspension or variation, or a cancellation of a suspension, of a condition under sub-section (6) may relate to all goods to which the permission relates or to particular goods to which the permission relates and may apply either generally or in particular circumstances.
'( 10) A permission under sub-section (2) is sUbjected to-
(a) the condition that the proprietor of the duty free shop to which the permission relates will ensure that relevant travellers to whom goods are delivered in accordance with the permission are aware of any conditions of the permission with which they are required to comply; and
(b) the condition that that proprietor will provide a Collector with proof, in a prescribed way and within a prescribed time, of the export of goods delivered to a relevant traveller in accordance with the permission.
'( II) If a person who is required to comply with a condition imposed in respect of a permission under sub-section (2) fails to comply with the condition, he is guilty of an offence against this Act punishable upon conviction by a penalty not exceeding$5,OOO.
'( 12) Where the proprietor of a duty free shop to which a permission under sub-section (2) relates does not produce the proof required by paragraph (10) (b) that goods delivered by him to a relevant traveller in accordance with the permission have been exported by that traveller, the goods shall be deemed to have been entered, and delivered, for home consumption by the proprietor, as owner of the goods, on the day on which the goods were delivered to that traveller.
'( 13) A Collector may, in accordance with the regulations, revoke a permission given under sub-section (2) in relation to the sale of goods occurring after the revocation. '.
Review of decision
"75. Section 162c of the Principal Act is amended-
(a) by ommitting from paragraph (I) (d) "and" (last occurring); and
(b) by adding at the end of sub-section (I) the following word and paragraph:
'; and (f) a decision of a Collector for the purposes of section 61 D.'. ".
The main purpose of the amendments is to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901 by inserting into each of those Acts a scheme of provisions to govern the sale and delivery by 'off airport' duty-free shops of duty-free goods to prospective air travellers. Amendment 5 proposes insertion of the necessary provisions into the Customs Act as a new section 96A. Amendment 15 proposes the insertion of corresponding provisions into the Excise Act as a new section 61 D. The provisions proposed to be inserted will provide authority for imposing on shop proprietors and purchasers conditions directed at ensuring that goods that are sold and delivered to travellers duty-free are, in fact, exported in accordance with the requirements applying.
The conditions that are intended to be imposed will, in effect, restate on a valid legal basis the conditions at present being applied. The purpose of these conditions is to place on the shop proprietors obligations to make travellers aware of the conditions with which they are required to

comply, keep records and furnish returns, produce satisfactory proof of export of goods and accept liability for payment of duty on goods in respect of which satisfactory proof of export is not produced. The provision of a legal basis for imposing conditions on purchasers will mean that such persons who fail to export goods purchased duty free will, in appropriate circumstances, become liable to prosecution.
One of the practices which I am sure would be condemned on both sides of the House but which, unfortunately, raises its head from time to time is when a person obtains an airline ticket for over~ seas travel, takes that airline ticket to a number of duty-free shops established outside airports, makes a number of duty-free purchases, cashes in the airline ticket and, in fact, never exports the goods. In that situation the revenue has been defrauded and the person has gained access to goods at duty free prices. It is the view of the Department, and one with which I entirely concur, that persons who behave in that way shall not only become liable to prosecution but also will in fact be prosecuted with the full force of the law. Therefore, the assistance of the duty-free shop operators in providing information which will enable the apprehension of these offenders is very much sought by the Government.
As the duty-free shops to which the proposed amendments relate have the status of being warehouses licensed for the purposes of the Customs Act, other provisions of a more general nature included in Part V of the Customs Act also have application in relation to the operation and control of such premises. Since the inception of duty-free shops, the general authority contained in section 40AA of the Customs Act and section 61A of the Excise Act to give permission for the movement of goods under continuing Customs control, subject to compliance with specified conditions, has been relied upon to render shop proprietors liable for duty on goods in respect of which satisfactory proof of export is not produced. Legal advice has recently been received, however, that, primarily because the duty-free procedures involve the permission holder relinquishing possession of goods for carriage to the aircraft by the traveller, who is not in the capacity of being an agent or servant of the shop proprietor, those general proyisions do not provide a satisfactory legal basis on which action can be taken to deal with breaches of the requirements or to recover duty in respect of goods not exported. The proposed amendments will not affect the present day to day operations of the duty-free industry as no change in the procedures at present being followed is envisaged.

832 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

My colleague the honourable member for Parramatta will no doubt refer to the fact that the Australian duty-free industry is not only growing at a very substantial pace but also forms an integral part of our tourism industry. With purchases in excess of $40m and total investment, including employment, in the industry of around $200m we are dealing with a very big industry. Permissions that have been given to proprietors under section 40AA of the Customs Act and section 61A of the Excise Act will, however, be required to be replaced by permissions given under the proposed new provisions when the necessary regulations are made and promulgated.
I should particularly mention, in view of deep concerns expressed by representatives of the dutyfree industry, that the placing of the proposed new provisions within Part V of the Customs Act will have the effect of rendering all administrative decisions made in pursuance of those provisions reviewable by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. That is the result of discussions between the industry and the Department culminating just two weeks ago in a conference in Canberra at which the industry was well represented by a former honourable senator, Mr Puplick, who presented the basic case on its behalf. The Department, the Minister and the Government have responded and the matters raised in respect of bringing appeals under Part V under the review of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal are now being implemented-a very speedy example of government responding to a proposal for reform which had merit and which is now about to be-
come law.
I turn now to the other proposed amendments that a close examination of the Bill during the period since its introduction has shown to be desirable. These are in the main of a relatively for-
mal nature requiring little explanation. I mention specifically, however, amendments 2, 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10 which are in this category but which are, of necessity, quite lengthy. They relate to certain situations in which the Comptroller-General, before arriving at a belief that a company is not a fit or proper company or a person is not a fit or proper person to hold a warehouse or depot licence, is required to have regard to certain prescribed matters. Included in these matters are any convictions of the company, or key personnel, for certain specified offences committed within 10 years immediately preceding the making of the application for the licence concerned.
Representations have been received from industry interests that, in circumstances relating to a licence that has been renewed on one or more occasions since the initial application for the

licence, regard should be had to only such convictions as may have been imposed during the IO-year period immediately preceding the application for the latest renewal of the licence. The Government sees these representations as being eminently reasonable and proposes that the necessary amendments to clauses 19 and 24 of the Bill should be made. In further response to concerns expressed by industry interests, amendment 12 modifies the right of access and entry to depots, proposed by clause 24 of the Bill, to be given to collectors, by authorising such access and entry only by a collector who is in official uniform or who, on request, produces to the depot proprietor written evidence of his official status.
I commend these amendments to the Committee. I believe them to be reasonable. In the main, they are responses to suggestions emanating from within the Department and from the Customs officers themselves, on the one side, and from private enterprise on the other. I feel some pride in now seeing a co-operation between industry and government on this very important issue. The continuing comprehensive review of the legislation will be maintained. The Government does not claim to have a monopoly on wisdom and I can assure the Committee that any suggestions from the Opposition, from my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta, from the industry and from honourable members will certainly be taken into account by the Government and will be responded to. I commend the amendments to the Committee.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (4.18)-At the very start of my short remarks, I say that the Opposition does not oppose the amendments introduced by the Government. In fact, we applaud them as being a sensible look at what was a difficult problem. I am heightened that the Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) went on to say that there will be continuing review of legislation as it affects all the activities of the Bureau of Customs. Of course, the Opposition has been suggesting that for quite a long time. I am rather intrigued with the Minister's remark about these amendments being the result of continuing negotiations between the Department, the Customs officers and various sections of private enterprise. Whilst I do not find that in the least distasteful, I find a certain inconsistency because of matters that have been brought to my attention today. The Minister pointed out that a former Liberal Party senator, Mr Puplick, had been the lobbyist on behalf of the

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 833

duty-free shop industry, suggesting these amendments to the Government. I am not at all disturbed that it has accepted them because I think they are quite reasonable.
However, I know that other groups of people are affected by various decisions made within the confines of the Bill as distinct from the amendments we are now debating. The three parties involved are the Australian Federation of Air Freight Forwarders, the Australian Chamber of Shipping and the Distilled Spirits Industry Council of Australia which, as I understand it, had also made a great deal of detailed submission to the Government with regard to some of the amendments in the main part of the Bill which was debated last week. As I understand it, their suggestions have fallen upon deaf ears. I suggest to them that perhaps they should get the ex-Senator Puplick as their lobbyist and then they might have more luck.
Various new amendments cover a whole range of activities including the controls over the unloading and handling of cargo, the entering of goods, a new system of licensing places as depots for the short term holding of import and export cargo, duty exemption on ships and aircraft stores, administrative arrangements for minor offences and overcoming administrative difficulties in the operation of existing legislation covering the licensing of Customs agents and Customs warehouses. All that these bodies were asking was that decisions made under these new amendments should be the subject of review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. In fact, these things have not been granted. Yet new amendments covering the administration of duty-free shops have been taken within the purview of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. There seems to me to be a certain inconsistency in the way that these submissions were handled.

interdepartmental committee looking at a submission that was put forward to this Government some years ago regarding the institution of dutyfree shops for returning Australian passengers. This proposition is apparently supported by Qantas Airways Ltd and quite a lot of other responsible bodies but, as yet, it has received no favourable response from the Government. As I understand it, the interdepartmental committee keeps fobbing off the suggestion that we should establish duty-free shops inside the Customs barriers at Australian airports to enable passengers returning to Australia to buy their duty-free goods in Australia. That seems to me to be a fairly reasonable proposition.
As I understand it, Qantas claims that on any flight into Australia these days it is carrying between 300 and 400 bottles of whiskey that people bought in faraway places such as Hong Kong, Singapore or wherever else to take advantage of the duty-free conditions. This applies also to cartons of cigarettes and numerous electronic devices. As I understand, people are prone to fiddle with those electronic devices in aeroplanes, interfering with the efficient maintenance of the radar systems. Qantas also objects to carting back freight free 400 bottles of whisky per flight. I believe that is also a reasonable response. I cannot see any reason at all why the Government could not look favourably upon the introduction of duty-free stores run by Australians in Australian airports so that passengers returning to Australia would not need to buy their duty-free goods in some offshore place but could buy them in Australia. Another advantage is that if one buys a radio from a duty-free store at Mascot Airport on the way in and it breaks down one can at least find the person from whom one bought it. If one bought that radio in the back streets of Kowloon one would have great difficulty in finding the Chinese gentleman who sold it.

I am not about to judge the merits of the submissions from the three groups I have mentioned but, having briefly read their submissions, they seem to me to be fairly reasonable. I suggest to the Minister newly charged with the responsibility for the Customs Bureau that he might look at the submissions these bodies put forward because they seem to bear a reasonable parallel to the arrangements that have now been made for duty-free shops. I leave that with the Minister to consider; he may be able to come back to me with a response.
The only other thing I would like to mention in the course of this debate on these amendments is my concern for the fact that there has been an

I suggest to the Government that it should look at the possibility of acceding to the request of Qantas and other people who have a responsible attitude to these things and do something about introducing these facilities here. The only other argument that is put forward in favour of not having them in Australia is that we are committed to helping some of the Third World or developing countries to develop their industries. Apparently, as I understand it, duty-free shopping is a very big part of that industry in some places. But, having flown through Singapore quite recently and seen the magnificent nature of the passenger terminal in Singapore, I do not think there is much argument in favour of getting Australians to buy their goods there to help the Singapore economy. As

834 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

you would know, Mr Deputy Speaker, Singapore has a favourable trade balance with Australia. That is just one port; there are many others. Perhaps I have been a little circumventive in my attitude to these amendments by bringing up that subject, Mr Deputy Speaker, nevertheless I have taken the opportunity and I thank you for allowing me that leniency.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (4.26)-1 wish to raise just a couple of matters very briefly. The Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) invited some comments. I was going to raise the question that the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) raised about allowing Australians to buy at airports in Australia on their return. I do not think he mentioned the fact that there have been some instances of people who have become slightly inebriated on aeroplanes and been told that they are not to have any more to drink, simply dipping into their duty-free whisky, and getting out of control. I understand that the previous Minister for Industry and Commerce was enthusiastic about the idea put forward by the honourable member for Parramatta but that the Customs people were not, saying that it would create difficulties at the unloading stage. For the life of me, I cannot see why that would be so. If people were to spend 10, 15 or 20 minutes making their duty-free purchases as they leave, it would simply mean that they arrive at the Customs and Immigration gates 10 or 15 minutes late. I would really like to be convinced of the arguments against the views put forward by the honourable member for Parramatta.
I mentioned privately to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) a couple of years ago-I think we are all aware of this-that coming into Australia are a very large number of duty-free goods, particularly items that are of an expensive nature but are small to handle, such as cameras and watches. I am talking of Nikkon and Pentax cameras, items that retail in Australia at $300 to $600 each. If one buys them duty free and sales tax free in Hong Kong or Singapore one will save roughly one-third. That is about the worst deal one would get today. What is happening is that if anybody wants to buy an expensive camera or watch--
Dr Klugman-Television set.
Mr COHENYes, television sets too. It is not very difficult for a person to know somebody who is going overseas-in fact, it it hard not to know someone who is travelling-and to say 'Here is what 1 want. 1 want a Pentax ME system' and save himself $150. 1 think that if we knew the amount of merchandise that is being brought in

for other people we would be quite staggered at the volume of cameras, watches and such items. Obviously people cannot bring in some items duty free, such as motor cars but they can bring in small inexpensive items such as those I have mentioned. It is done and it is done frequently. Hundreds of thousands of expensive cameras and watches must be coming into this country. I am
not trying to stop that. 1 may be wrong, but to the best of my knowledge there is no degree of manufacture in Australia of either of those items, so we are not trying to protect Australian watch makers or camera makers. Why does the Department of Industry and Commerce not consider removing both sales tax-
Mr John Brown-There is no duty on watches.
Mr COHEN-As the shadow Minister points out, there is no duty on watches, but there is a very substantial sales tax, and there is duty and there is sales tax on cameras, from recollection. So what we are doing is simply shifting the point of purchase of watches and cameras to outside Australia. I think it is worth an inquiry to see whether by removing sales tax on those two items we would bring that trade into Australia for Australia's watch and camera retail stores. It seems to me to be something that is worth looking at. I also understand that the same may well apply to the question of golf clubs. A very large number of golf clubs are being imported into the country. I think we sometimes take a short-sighted view. To collect a small amount of sales tax we are driving literally millions of dollars worth of business into the hands of other countries. The Australian retail sector could probably benefit in the long fun from a change. I would like the Minister to look at that suggestion to see whether it is worthwhile giving it some consideration.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (4.31)-1 wish to take up the point raised by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) about the lack of review procedures in this legislation in relation to appeals to the Administrative Appeals Tribunals against Customs officers' decisions. I had some discussions this morning with the Australian Federation of Air Freight Forwarders, the Australian Chamber of Shipping and the Distilled Spirits Industry Council of Australia. Representatives of those three industry groups explained to me that they had had some discussions with the Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman), who is in the chamber today. Their main part of disagreement with this proposed legislation was that administrative decisions made pursuant to the proposed new section 65A would not be reviewable by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. It was their

Customs and Excise Amendment Bill

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 835

view that that was quite necessary. Considering that this legislation extends certain rights of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, I was concerned to see why other areas had been excluded from this appeal procedure.
I shall go on to explain a little more about this matter as it has been referred to me. The concern of the Australian Federation of Air Freight Forwarders is that proposed new section 65A confers substantial discretionary powers on Customs officers but no ready recourse is provided for a review of the exercise of such powers. Member companies of the Federation deal with consignments of air freight that originates in many overseas countries and airports. The capacities of members of the air freight industry to comply with decisions made by Customs officers in relation to Customs requirements under such a section would inevitably vary enormously because the standard and timeliness of data available to industry members vary enormously depending on the exporting freight forwarder, the airline company, the flight itinerary and the standards of documentation at overseas airports of loading. Is it a reasonable requirement, then, for one flight or one category of flight necessarily to prevail across the whole spectrum of aircraft movements?
Basically these organisations consider that it would be unsatisfactory if decisions as to requirements in these matters could be made without their being subject to the discipline of review by a readily accessible independent umpire provided by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. In other words, these organisations are saying that they want some channel of appeal against decisions taken by Customs officers. They are not debating the Customs officers' right to seek information, whether oral or documentary. I understand that the point they have put to the Minister and to the Government in relation to this matter is that they would like some channel of appeal. All I am asking in the short time available is for the Minister in his reply to explain why he has refused to allow these organisations that appeals process.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.35)-In reply to the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) and the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) in relation to what is known as inwards duty-free shopping, I indicate that that matter is currently under the consideration of the Government. It does not just involve the Department of Industry and Commerce, it also involves the Department of Aviation. There are a number of arguments for and against the proposal that visitors or Australians returning to

Australia should be able to purchase duty free at the airport before passing through Customs. I am well aware of the proposition by Qantas Airways Ltd which is to reduce the amount of goods which are brought in on flights. One of the problems would be: At what price would the purchaser pay? Would he pay at the Australian price, or would he get the bottle of whisky at the price that was applicable in the country from which he had just come, whether it be Singapore, Hong Kong or whatever? I invite both honourable members if they would like to pursue the matter to let us have their submissions as the matter is currently under consideration.
I note the matters which have been raised by the honourable member for Robertson on the question of watches and cameras. I will refer it to
the Minister concerned and get back to the honourable member if there is any additional information. It has however been drawn to my attention that Treasury has a very significant interest in this aspect because of the sales tax. On the matter which was raised by the honourable member for Parramatta, I do not know the groups to whom he was referring when he talked of representations. I assure him that at the meeting that took place a fortnight ago, there were persons there who were not part of the main group-if I can use that expression-whose case was presented by Mr Puplick. Mr Puplick was successful on the matters where he was able to persuade, but there were matters on which he was not successful. If after the debate is concluded, the honourable member would like to draw my specific attention to the names of the persons to whom he has referred I will ascertain from within the Department where the submissions are and what the response is.
I would like to respond to the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) in some little detail on section 65A of the Customs Act and the Excise Act. I think there is a genuine misunderstanding on the part of those who have approached the honourable member as to what exactly the implications of section 65A are and whether in fact any rights are affected in such a way that it would be appropriate to bring them under the review of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The right to require adequate information in relation to a ship, its cargo, voyage, crew, passengers and so on, is not contested on either side of the House. That being the case, there should be no objection to the exercise of that right on the basis that the collector has a discretion as to when-I emphasise this-the information should be given. In other words, if it is not convenient for the information to be given there and then, the collector can say: 'I will postpone

836 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982 Activities ofShip Painters and Dockers' Union

the time when the information should be given'. The requirement for a person to answer questions and produce documents is explicitly limited to the ability of that person to do so at any given time. From the point of view of the Government we say that no onerous, unreasonable or additional burden can be seen as being placed upon persons obliged to tender the information. We would have to argue that no rights could therefore be adversely affected to warrant the attention of the AAT. The proposed provision is seen as working to the advantage of ship operators, a screening of manifests, et cetera, before arrival of a vessel will obviate any need to hold back discharge and dispersal of cargo until after arrival screening is carried out.
In conclusion, the only other point I wish to make is that whilst from time to time one hears criticisms of Customs officers, I think honourable members would be interested to know that the volume of complaints against Customs officers as part of the departmental correspondence is very, very minute. If there is a situation in which an officer does misbehave-I would have to say that is more likely to be the exception than the rulethere are alternatives available to the party aggrieved, other than the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. I mention simply the right to action at common law and the often forgotten but nevertheless fundamental basis of the law in this country, that is, the prerogative writ. I commend the amendments to the House.
Amendments agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman)-by \eaveread a third time.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE FEDERATED SHIP
PAINTERS AND DOCKERS UNION
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I table volume 1 of the fourth interim report of the Royal Commission on the activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union.
Motion (by Mr N. A. Brown)-by leaveagreed to:
That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of

volume I of the fourth interim report of the Royal Commission on the activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union.
Mr N. A. BROWN-by leave-The volume I have tabled is part of a series of interim reports the Royal Commission has provided since it was established by the Commonwealth and Victorian Governments in September 1980. The first two reports dealt with unfolding investigations and, on the advice of the Royal Commissioner, Mr F. X. Costigan, Q.c., they were not tabled. The third interim report, which dealt largely with fraudulent taxation schemes, was tabled earlier this year. The Government recently received the Commission's fourth interim report, in three volumes. Mr Costigan recommended against tabling the second and third volumes, but saw no objection in regard to volume 1 and envisaged that it would be made public. The Government has given very close consideration to the question of tabling of volume 1. That volume includes findings and observations that make damaging allegations in relation to a number of individuals. Findings and conclusions of a royal commission are matters that need to be taken seriously, though they are not, of course, findings of guilt whether they relate to criminal offences or to matters of discipline. For criminal charges, the guilt or innocence of a person is determined by the Courts; for disciplinary charges, Acts of Parliament provide for decision by appropriate tribunals. Notwithstanding these considerations, the Government has concluded that there is an over riding public interest in the matters canvassed that calls for tabling of all but two paragraphs of that volume. Two paragraphs have been excluded having regard to their contents and to the fact the Commissioner is to make further inquiries into the matter discussed in them.
Matters Relating to the Union, its Members and Others
The report gives substance to the grave concerns that led the Government to set up the Royal Commission. Volume 1 deals with the Commission's knowledge and findings on some aspects of the activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, its members and persons associated with them. It describes a history of violence, and the ruthless means by which members of the Union have arrogated to themselves a position outside the law. It tells of the Union's ability to provide individuals with a new name and a new identity, and some of the uses that are made of these. The Royal Commission has developed a practice of referring to appropriate law enforcement agencies particular criminal activities as they are identified. Many of the activities described in the report are of direct

Activities a/Ship Painters and Dockers' Union 24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 837

concern to Victoria and its police. The Victorian Government has a copy of the report except for paragraphs 1.13 and 1.14 and chapter 3 which appear only in the report to the Governor General.
The Royal Commission has pointed in another volume to the need for a special group to prepare and conduct the prosecutions necessary to suppress the criminal activity uncovered by its continuing investigations. The Government stands ready to set up such a group. The Attorney General, Senator Durack, will be considering this matter urgently, in consultation with Mr Costigan and the Victorian Government initially.
Action to Progress Taxation Prosecutions
Attention is also being given as a matter of priority to the prosecution of offences associated with bottom-of-the-harbour tax evasion schemes which are referred to in volume I.
In June this year the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Attorney-General took steps to obtain advice from the Solicitor-General in regard to the availability of prosecution action in the particular case dealt with in chapter 3 of volume I. The Solicitor-General, in an opinion delivered later in the same month, advised that certain remedies were open.
Advice was also sought from senior counsel in June on possible criminal proceedings in relation to a major promoter in Sydney. A final opinion is expected shortly.
On the particular case referred to in chapter 3 of the report, the Crown Solicitor sent an officer from his central office to Perth to work in association with the Australian Taxation Office to complete a brief to advise on evidence and to draw charges as appropriate. That brief has been delivered to senior counsel.
More generally it has been decided to appoint a special prosecutor to concentrate special effort on action with a view to prosecution of persons who were directly involved in the promotion and execution of bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. The special prosecutor will be assisted by a task force of lawyers, taxation officers and police. There will be liaison with the Royal Commission. Additional staff and resources will be provided as needed. We will be seeking the fullest co-operation from State authorities. The Victorian Government has already proposed a joint effort and the Attorney General will be discussing this matter with them.
Decisions on prosecutions or other proceedings will, of course, be made on the evidence available and on the law applicable. But the Attorney General is firmly of the view that those who were

most directly involved in the promotion and execution of blatantly fraudulent tax evasion schemes should be dealt with when their conduct can be shown to have been in breach of the criminallaw. Where appropriate, civil action for recovery of moneys will be pursued as well.
National Crimes Commission and the Future of the Royal Commission
The Royal Commission's fourth interim report underlines the need which the Government has seen for some time for the establishment of a national crimes commission. Mr Costigan himself has recommended action along these lines.
The Commonwealth envisages a national crimes commission as a standing body, established by legislation, with special powers to investigate and initiate action against serious criminal activity. Such a body would supplement existing law enforcement efforts in areas of need. In particular, a crimes commission could be directed to: Organised crime; white collar crime; and corruption of officials and official bodies.
The primary objective of such a commission would be to bring about prosecutions in appropriate cases. The commission would be involved in such prosecutions rather than recommending prosecutions and leaving action on them to others. It would not produce reports naming individuals as suspected of committing criminal offences.
The Commonwealth is seeking the cooperation of the States. The matter was discussed at the Police Ministers Conference last week and will be discussed further at the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General later this week. The Royal Commission's report is relevant to the deliberations of those meetings.
Mr Costigan refers in the volume that has been tabled to other areas, mentioned in the confidential volumes, that are of major significance and concern to government and community. He says his Commission will be unable to complete its investigations by its present report date of 31 December 1982 and states that continued investigation must take place whether by his Commission or some other body.
The Government would see the proposed national crimes commission as an appropriate body in due course to carryon the work of the Royal Commission. In the meantime, the Government will consult with the Victorian Government on the question of extending Mr Costigan's Commission.

838 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982 Activities ofShip Painters and Dockers' Union

Findings Affecting the Crown Solicitor's Office
Chapter 3 of volume I focuses on an episode of particular concern to the Government. The episode relates to the performance of the Crown Solicitor's Division of the Attorney-General's Department and in particular of the office of the Deputy Crown Solicitor in Perth.
The report recounts the handling by the Crown Solicitor's Office of a case of an alleged fraudulent tax evasion scheme referred to it in 1974 by the Australian Taxation Office in Perth following an investigation by that office. The scheme, of the kind commonly referred to as a bottom-of-theharbour scheme, involved the stripping of company assets so as to cheat the revenue of taxes. The report states that, after counsel's opinion was obtained, the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office was requested in August 1975 to commence a prosecution.
Mr Costigan reports a history of events and circumstances in the handling of the matter by the Crown Solicitor's office, and of dealings between that office and the Taxation Office. The history reveals inaction and negligence on the part of the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth. The problems described are said to go further than the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth, and to bear on the control and supervision of the Perth office by the Crown Solicitor's central office in Canberra. The matter concluded with advice from the Crown Solicitor's central office that the evidence was insufficient to establish a criminal conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth.
The Attorney-General should not be taken as accepting without reservation all the conclusions and views expressed by the Commissioner in relation to individual persons. The Attorney General does not accept the views expressed by the Commissioner in paragraph 3.89 of the report to the effect that a new law was not needed. But the views expressed require action.
Remedial Action in Regard to the Crown Solicitor's Office
The standing of the Crown Solicitor's Office, and the integrity and competence of some of its officers, are brought into question by these matters.The proper course is to deal with the problem quickly and effectively.
A number of officers referred to in the report have retired since the time of their involvement. There is no suggestion that any committed a criminal offence. The Commission has been critical of some officers who remain on the staff. It has expressed conclusions of a very serious character in relation to two officers. One of these officers

was directly involved in the conduct of the particular case referred to by the Commission. Another was not officially involved in it but in the course of its investigation the Commission found some association between this officer and a number of companies which seem to have been involved in bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. Other conduct in which this officer was found to be involved also gives cause for concern.
As a first step, the divisional manager of the Crown Solicitor's Division was sent to Perth to undertake inquiries there and to examine work in the office that was allotted to those officers. The two officers have been suspended from duty pending decisions whether to charge either or both of them with disciplinary offences under the Public Service Act. Appropriate action under that Act is in process.
On the wider questions of organisation, management and control of the Crown Solicitor's Division, the former Crown Solicitor initiated an internal management review in 1978 which culminated in the establishment of a joint management review of the Crown Solicitor's Divsion in 1979. That review was carried out from November 1979 to June 1980. That review, by a team consisting of a private management consultant, a representative of the Public Service Board and a Crown Solicitor's officer, recommended major changes in the management structure. Its recommendations were readily accepted by the Attorney-General's Department. Considerable progress has been made in implementation. One of the major recommendations of the JMR was for the establishment of a management and coordination branch of the Crown Solicitor's Div-
ision headed by a first assistant crown solicitor having a local designation of divisional manager. A major function of this branch is to develop and improve Deputy Crown Solicitor's offices and to co-ordinate, guide and oversight the work of those offices. The three top positions in the branch are filled and working. Other appointments are in train.
There remains, however, a question as to the adequacy of the staff resources of the Crown Solicitor's Division. The Government has asked the Public Service Board to report to it as a matter of urgency on the adequacy of the staffing and resources of the Crown Solicitor's Division. In view of the Royal Commission's findings, however, the Government sees a need for a more particular external examination of the Perth office and its relationship to the Crown Solicitor's central office in Canberra and with the Australian Taxation Office and other client bodies in Perth. The Attorney-General is arranging for such an

Activities a/Ship Painters and Dockers' Union 24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 839

examination to be carried out by the President of the Law Council of Australia or by a suitably qualified person nominated by the President. In brief, the terms of reference of the inquiry will be as follows:
To review the operation of the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office, Perth, generally, but with particular regard to
(a) the professional performance of the Office;
(b) the adequacy of the management and the effectiveness of work control systems;
(c) the adequacy of numbers of professional and support staff to ensure the timely performance of work at an appropriate level of quality;
(d) the effectiveness of the organisation of the Office for the provision of legal services for the Commonwealth Government;
(e) the effectiveness of supervision of the Office by the Crown Solicitor's central office; and
(f) the effectiveness of procedures in client departments in relation to matters referred to the Office.
Recommendations for Changes in Section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and the Royal
Commissions Act
Mr Costigan has recommended a number of changes in the secrecy provisions of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act to allow in particular for more access to and use of Taxation Office information in law enforcement. These recommendations are for changes additional to the amendments to the secrecy provisions made earlier this year. The Government will give early and careful consideration to these recommennations. The Government will also examine carefully the Royal Commission's recommendations for amendments to the Royal Commission's Act to provide additional powers in regard to search warrants and compulsion of witnesses. I present the following paper:
Federated Ship Painters and Dockers' Union-4th Interim Report of the Royal Commission-Volume I-Ministerial Statement, 24 August 1982.
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveproposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Sir James Killen)--by leaveagreed to:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would enable the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to speak for 16 minutes.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.57)-1 do not know whether I can deal with this matter adequately in 16 minutes but I will do my best. The speech made by the Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown) is another part of the serial in respect of tax avoidance in this country. We now have a further report from Mr Costigan, a practising lawyer, who was given the job of investigating certain matters relating to the activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. Let me say at the onset that I think the matter goes past the activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. It goes to highly organised crime and to the fact that the taxpayer in this country has been asked to foot the bill for people who are guilty of criminal activities and did not pay their tax. I think it begs the question for the Government to suggest in a few sentences that perhaps all will be well because it will do certain things. It cuts no ice with me to suggest that one of the best things to do is to institute remedial action in the Crown Solicitor's Office. We cannot put all the blame on to the Perth office when we know that the legal opinion given to the Perth office was also given to the Commissioner of Taxation and the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation.
What is this matter about? Is it not about incompetence, ineptitude and what Parliament does when Ministers have to administer laws which they are unwilling or unable to administer? That is the real crux of the matter. We have had nothing but explanations. On this occasion I note again that there will be some suggestion of amending section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. That provision relates to secrecy. That is not a new matter either. If we refer back to the Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs, we will see that three years ago Mr Justice Williams recommended that something be done about making taxation records available in relation to criminal matters. Taxation avoidance is obviously a crime. As a safeguard one needed a judicial warrant.
I noticed a long mea culpa statement on 27 June by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) explaining all the things he was not able to find out or do. I noticed that he said he had an opinion back in 1974 for a prosecution in relation to a matter. I wrote to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) on 29 July asking whether I could have a look at that opinion. The answer I received today, which I think is rather appropriate, was no, I could not. I

840 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982 Activities o/Ship Painters and Dockers' Union

wish to give high praise to the McCabe-Lafranchi report. It was a Victorian report which the Cain Government tabled, but it was commissioned by the earlier government. That report clearly shows that active criminal elements were involved not in the initiation of tax avoidance but in the final guarantee that nobody would be found. The painters and dockers were involved in the lowest level of that activity. What about the people who earned the money and did not pay tax? Not one of them has been dealt with. What is the excuse? Let me refer to the McCabe-Lafranchi report, which at page 25, states:
. . . the dealer sold on upwards of 3,000 companies to sham directors . . . no prosecution has been instituted by the Australian Taxation Office . . . and . " . only two sale-on transactions have been fully investigated.
Can we say that people are doing their jobs? Can we put the whole blame on the Public Service structure? Surely we would know what was happening in regard to the massive numbers of people we could not find. Surely we would know, as the Treasurer himself admits on page 24 of his statement, about this picture developing. He said that in 1975 he found 729 participants involved in tax avoidance. The next year the figure grew to 2,700 and the following year grew to 10,200. He accepts that there are over 31,000 tax avoidance cases dating from 1975 to 1979. Is it not incredible to think that when one has that matter within one's control, one cannot find out what is wrong?
It took McCabe and Lafranchi to identify some of the matters. It took Mr Costigan, investigating another matter altogether-the Ship Painters and Dockers Union-to advert to the fraud of the Commonwealth. Unless (hose two groups had been set up we would still be walking around in the dark wondering what happened to the tax revenue. Cain, the Premier of Victoria, made the very valid statement that the amount of fraud could be $6 billion. That is no small amount of money. If we were able to offer that amount in tax cuts it would be considerable. The Opposition will not get the benefit of recommendations which, as I understand it, are contained in two other volumes of this report because Mr Costigan considers it is not in the public interest that they be disclosed. I ask the Government to make them available to the Leader of the Opposition.
If one looks at organised crime in this country, one will see that it does not relate only to activities within this country. It involves international efforts; it relates to heroin dealings; and it relates to massive amounts of moneys being transferred out of this country. I understand that that might be the reason why the Government is, at this

stage, unable to do anything about making the parts I have referred to public. Will this matter be solved by establishing a crimes commission? I see nothing wrong with a crimes commission. But we do not want to have a crimes commission that will be bogged down by a rigid framework or whose instructions are so general.
What we need is a crimes commission that has specific instructions, that has accountability that enables it to deal with specific matters that we-the Parliament-determine. We cannot have a rambling commission that can go on and on without us knowing whether it wi1l maintain the interest. It is very clear that practising members of the legal profession are required to identify clearly what has been going wrong. It is very clear that Government Ministers are unable to do it. We must not blame the present Treasurer. The previous Treasurer, the right honourable member for Flinders, Sir Phillip Lynch, must have had some knowledge of these matters which relate to the inability to collect revenue. Surely legal advice ought to have been expected from an Attorney General or Attorneys-General. Surely they know the law. Surely they must have seen some evidence of fraud when they were trying to identify the number of companies that could not be found.
In one case-I think it was Keirad Pty Ltd, formerly Corser Homes, in Western Australia-a liquidator was appointed. I will deal with that matter in a minute. Nothing was ever done; nothing happened. Yet that is one matter in respect of which we are aware of some initiation of action. Why was no action taken in respect of Corser Homes? It appears from Mr Costigan's report that the liquidator got no help at all. The McCabe-Lafranchi report states that the investigation sections were aware that companies were being dumped. The question must be asked: Why was no action taken? Companies, all across Australia-not just in Perth-were being dumped. They were being dumped everywhere and nothing was done. Whatever the position, Mr Costigan states, those responsible for the decision not to prosecute ought to be regarded as at least partly answerable for massive losses of revenue. He goes on to make the point that the failure to prosecute certainly promoted what he calls the nerve of the main promotor. The principle of deterrence was not utilised. According to the McCabe-Lafranchi report and the Victorian Corporate Affairs Office, the Victorian office is still receiving particulars from directors and officers which are false and misleading. Accordingly, the abuse of the philosophy is still continuing. The philosophy is that because of the legislation which

Activities o/Ship Painters and Dockers' Union 24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 841

the Treasurer introduced in 1980, taxation avoidance would be eliminated. In other words, it is still going on and it is flourishing. How stupid it is to see the Treasurer acting like little boy lost saying: 'It has all been fixed up'. It takes the presentation of these reports before one can find out how incompetent and unable the Government is to deal with the matter.
One should look at the sheer facts. I have already pointed out that banks at a little place called Stones Corner in Brisbane in one afternoon dealt with transactions of $30m to $50m, involving perhaps 50 companies which were changing hands. What more evidence does the Government want of conspiring in relation to such sham actions? What was wrong with the law under the Federal Crimes Act which relates to conspiracy to defraud. Surely the Government could have dealt with it using the provisions of this Act. What was wrong with the use of section 231, and others, of the Income Tax Assessment Act which talks about tax avoidance being an offence which certainly renders a person liable to a double penalty.
When one is talking about a conspiracy arrangement and Dorothy Dix letters which are written within the Australian Taxation Office, one notes that McCabe and Lafranchi were unable to get possession of the evidence. What do the people of Australia think when they realise that laws are passed and nobody will implement them despite legal advice that has been given by two top Q.Cs. Mr Brinsden is one. I will not name the other one but I mentioned him the other day. He is a leading Q.c. from Victoria. In 1978, he said: 'You certainly should be prosecuting in these matters'. His opinion was that if a conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth can be established there is a strong possibility that the agreement being the subject of that conspiracy is itself a nullity. Do we need this present charade which is coming from the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and others that we need to pass retrospective legislation. The Government does not need to do it. It should be prosecuting now. One can set aside every purported transfer pursuant to a sham or fraudulent transaction. The legal opinion on that issue was given as far back as 1978. The point was made that the vendors are still liable. In fact they are liable.
What is this Government about? Is it trying to hoodwink the people of Australia that it never had the power, that it did not know, that it needs to pass more laws when the legal advice and the facts clearly show that it has had the power all the time. The only thing that has been wrong with this Government is its incompetence and inability to accept the law. What value is it to have in this

statement the Attorney-General saying that he does not accept the suggestion in paragraph 389 of the Costigan report. Paragraph 389 of Mr Costigan's report states:
What was worse was that the Crown Solicitor's Office permitted the inference to arise that the existing law was not adequate and that new laws were needed. Thus the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia was induced to enact new criminal laws of great breadth and scope when all that was required was the enforcement of the existing laws.
Is it any wonder that the Attorney-General cannot accept that advice? It shoots holes through the present posture of the Government that it needs to pass new laws. Two opinions were given, one by Mr Brinsden who was mentioned, but also by another person. What lawyer worth his salt would not advise that there was a conspiracy to defraud and the Government could surely do something about it. So there is incompetence and there is a failure of ministerial responsibility.
There is the extraordinary claim that action is exempted by section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act contains certain secrecy provisions. But, if one looks closely at it, one will see that a lot of people are able to get information if the Treasurer permits it. We have this incredible situation, by self interpretation, that the Treasurer can make information available to a number of people but he cannot even get any information himself, not about the detail but about the amount of the fraud. Is it not important that, when Ministers are appointed to proper responsible office, they administer that office? The whole series of events here shows dreadful problems about the inability of a Minister to administer a department, whether it be the Attorney-General's Department or the Taxation Office.
Both the Attorneys-whether they be present or past-certainly should have known what their responsibilities were. The present Treasurer and his predecessor surely should have known what their responsibilities were. What value is it for us to have this nonsense by the Treasurer who, when talking about a prosecution that Mr Brinsden recommended but was not proceeded with for four or five years and which then lapsed because of what was deemed insufficient evidence-it now comes to light that the insufficient evidence was obviously hidden by somebody who might be guilty-made the point that with the benefit of hindsight, of course, such a period seems inordinately long. Nobody in his right mind would make statements like that. Surely the Treasurer could have told us in June that he knew that an opinion had been given and that it was not carried out. He makes no reference to the fact that there was an inability to carry out that opinion.

842 REPRESENTATlVES 24 August 1982 Activities ofShip Painters and Dockers' Union

By way of excuse, the Treasurer makes the point that it is very difficult to establish a charge of conspiracy. He says that conspiracy cases are notoriously difficult to establish and sustain. Nonsense! One can get the facts from McCabe and Lafranchi who interviewed people who admitted that the whole series of transactions were a sham from the word go. There is certainly plenty of evidence from people which clearly indicates, apart from the facts themselves, that there was conspiracy. That is the important part. Why was it not disclosed?
I think it is important that this matter be the subject of investigation. I think it is important that the Prime Minister has a look at the conduct of the departments and the Ministers concerned from the point of view of giving the nation some assurance that we do not need to have a parade of proposed laws here to remedy the defects. The clear evidence was that the defects were always remedial in terms of the advice given by legal opinion. That is the nub of what we are about at the present time. (Extension oftime granted).
In the remaining few minutes let us look at what Mr Costigan has said. He makes the point on page 35 of his report that in the opinion of Mr Brinsden, QC., something should have been done and prosecutions should have been launched. Page 36 of the report states:
Mr Brinsden's opinion was sent to the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, and then to the Commissioner of Taxation.
One cannot limit it to the Perth office; it had spread past that. I make the point in the same context, now that the Treasurer is here, that it was known also that another opinion was given in Victoria in 1978 on the same issue.
Mr Howard-September 1978.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-The Treasurer admits that he knows of it. I am pleased about that. At page 69 Mr Costigan states:
To assert that there was insufficient evidence to establish an intent to defraud the Commonwealth was contrary to Mr Brinsden's opinion . . .
Yet the Treasurer asserted it in his statement of June this year. Mr Costigan made this point:
To make such a statement without explaining how these responsible and diligent people had been wrong was to display a contemptuous attitude towards them and the Taxation Office, and it ill became the Crown Solicitor's Office.
Why are we getting all this nonsense when Costigan can clearly show quite properly how preposterous it was to suggest that? I have already dealt with the fact-I emphasise this-that there was no need to alter the existing law. The laws were quite adequate. No new laws were needed. Mr Costigan says that what was needed was a

guarantee that the existing laws would be applied. The report states:
To say that the new laws have been effective is not to answer this criticism. The new laws will be effective only if they are enforced.
It is no good talking about having a crimes commission and all these other things unless we can get to the facts. It would not be able to get to the facts. There is nothing in the statement today that would identify these facts. The Government needed to apply the law. It needed a prosecution. Mr Costigan said:
The only reason why the former laws were not effective . . . was because those laws were not enforced. The new law will also be ineffective if it is not enforced.
The answer lies not in new laws but in the enforcement, promptly, of the old.
The criminal proceedings would have had a salutary effect upon the promotion of the fraudulent schemes.
That is the issue. Mr Costigan talked about the unfortunate liquidator-the only one who was ever appointed. He had an horrendous task. Mr Costigan said that after seven years the liquidator appointed by the Government gave up the ghost because he could not get any answers, even to letters. Mr Costigan makes the point:
Given that 7 years had passed without any help from the one party who could assist, the feelings of a liquidator are understandable.
Is it not incredible to think that nobody would know that the liquidator was having trouble, that the liquidator was writing all these letters? He made the point that in those circumstances the failure of the Taxation Office to equip the liquidator with the records explains the situation. We are happy to know, of course, that the liquidator now has the records, having got them in recent days. Mr Costigan made the point that the Taxation Office lives in a Federal system and it is subject to the laws of both the States and the Commonwealth and it should learn to live with them and have regard for its responsibilities. That would apply to Ministers as well.
Talking about the problems of the Perth office, Mr Costigan made the point on page 85 that Canberra was just as involved. Everyone in Canberra had the legal opinions. Why would one blame just some public servant in Perth if that was the issue? On page 90 Mr Costigan talks about the proliferation of these schemes, about how they mushroomed. Mr Costigan made a very valid point when he stated:
Whereas with inflation there has been a great increase-six fold-in the taxable incomes of individuals, there has been only a slight increase in the taxable incomes of private companies.

Social Welfare

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 843

There is the lesson. There has been a six-fold increase for the pay-as-you-earn taxpayer, who has had to bear this burden, and hardly any in the company structure. Would not any alert Treasurer notice the position? Would he not notice that he was not getting the revenue from the company section? Would he not notice that there was an additional burden on the unfortunate PA YE taxpayer? Is that not clearly a searchlight that he should have noticed and done something? In speeches we have been making here for a long while we have been asking the Treasurer why he is continuing to increase the burden in the light of this evasion, which we can identify as amounting to $6 billion. These facts ought to be highlighted.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Deputy Leader of the Opposition's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr McLean) adjourned.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed from 17 August, on the following paper presented by Mr Wilson:
Social Welfare Objectives, Ministerial Statement, 17 August 1982
and on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the House take note of the paper.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (5.21)-ln continuing my remarks on this statement of the other evening I think, perhaps, I should begin with the observation I made the other evening that in looking at this social welfare statement in relation to the Budget we need to observe that nothing concentrates this Government's mind better on the needs of the poor than the approach of an election. It is characteristic of this social welfare statement that we have here a consideration of the poor in this society to an extent that I can remember in no previous Fraser Budget. I suggest that the reasons for that concentration are not all completely admirable. We on this side of the House welcome some of the generosity that has been shown in aspects of the social welfare provision in the Budget. Certainly, there is increased welfare expenditure, but it must be confessed that it is spread fairly thinly. Many of the small presents made in the Budget are merely an acknowledgment of seven years of neglect by the Fraser Government. Indeed, most of the provisions can be summed up as too little and too late.
Problems recognised in the Budget should have been recognised years ago and remedial action should have been provided years ago. Many of

these difficulties needed the provision of regular increments-not a sudden pre-election handout. Many of these problems would have been better dealt with if they had been dealt with over seven years in a remedial manner rather than in this sudden and, in some cases, rather surprising pre-election handout. Let us take an example. The Budget provides a derisory rise of $4 a week for the unemployed 16 and 17 year olds. For seven years there has been no increase. It has stood at $36 since 1975; it has now been raised to $40. It has been frozen, therefore, for seven years at that level. In that period pensions have been lifted 14 times. All I am suggesting is that a government which really cared about these problems would have been doing something over the years to adjust that provision. In those seven years the value of the dollar has been nearly halved, so that even the $40 which will be provided from 1 November is roughly equivalent to $20 in 1975. The $4 increase is, in fact, no compensation whatsoever for that erosion. The figure of $40 a week for a single person is still less than half the poverty line. There seems to be no recognition in the Budget that many of these young people need to live away from home on that $40 a week. The
reasons for them having to live away from home can be catalogued. In many cases, given the nature of poverty and unemployment in our society, these young people come from families which are already very poor and which have difficulties in coping with near adult children. So in many cases they have to leave the family situation and somehow survive on $40 a week, that is, on $5 a day. There are young people in country families who can find employment only by moving away from their family in the country situation and coming to the city to look for jobs. But how can such people survive in our cities today on $5 a day? There does not seem to be any recognition at all of the kind of degradation that these young people will often be thrown into as a result of a search for work with quite inadequate living provisions to sustain them during that search for work. It is perhaps all right if the young person has a complete family backup-family accommodation, family provision and family support. But for many of the young people we are talking about-for many of these 16-year-olds and 17year-olds-there is not that family backup. They do not have family financial resources and they are required to exist entirely on what was $36 a week for seven years and what has now been raised to $40 a week.
Let it be quite clear that if the Government is sincerely concerned, and not simply electorally concerned, with the problems these people face,

844 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Social Welfare

there is a need at least for a living away from home supplement for the young unemployed. The very least we could demand is that for young people who are not backed and supported in a home situation there should be a living away from home supplement. I beg the Government to look at that provision as a possible support for these young people.
Let us take the family allowance as another example of rather belated activity by the Government. From 1976 to 1981-for those five yearsthere was, in fact, no change whatsoever in the family allowance. It simply was provided and it was gradually eroded over those five years. Budgets came and went and no change was made to the family allowance. The value of the family allowance was reduced in those five years by about 60 per cent. Let us be fair to the Government. The 1981 Budget-that is last year's
Budget-gave a substantial rise but only for third and subsequent children. So after last year's Budget there was some improvement in the case of 25 per cent of all families with dependent children. Finally, this year the Budget has looked after the other 75 per cent by providing a rise for first and second children.
But when we look at those figures we find that the total expenditure is $396m short of what it would have been in 1982-83 if there had been proper indexation from 1976. That is, if the family allowance had been properly indexed from the time it was introduced it would be costing the Government-therefore, be paid to familiesnearly $400m a year more than is now provided. What does that mean? In terms of a family with five children that is something like $33.20 a month less or nearly $400 a year less simply because the Government has failed to index this provision. Even though the Government can now talk of the increases it has carried through, those increases still trail behind indexation as, of course, they trail behind indexation over the whole range of social welfare provisions.
Thirdly, when we examine these proposals we find that the unemployed remain the group most discriminated against by this Government. Of all the social security beneficiaries they are the ones who are discriminated against, particularly the adult unemployed without dependants. It is true that the benefit for the adult unemployed without dependants will be raised from I November 1982 from the present $58.10 a week to $64 a week so that it will become half the rate paid to an unemployed couple. This is the third rise in this grant in three years. We appreciate the fact that the Government has begun to take action in this area, but one of the reasons for its taking action is

simply the moral problem that developed in this area. The single rate was less than half the married rate. It encouraged de facto relations amongst young people in order simply to get the married rate and twice-yearly ind9tltion, and the Government's moralistic problems caught up with it. Of course, these are the sorts of things which flow from these forms of payment. It is true that the Government has made an effort to cope with this problem but as the single rate is not indexed and as the employment benefit for married couples is indexed, very rapidly these two will become apart
again and the same problems will arise. That is one form of discrimination.
Another form of discrimination against the unemployed when compared with other pensioners and beneficiaries of the same age and with the same needs is that, firstly, the unemployed are not paid supplementary allowances. They often face the same costs in rent as pensioners in private rental accommodation. Indeed, I can see no difference between the problems faced by poor pensioners and the problems faced by the unemployed in the search for private rental accommodation and the cost of that rental accommodation. In many cases the resources of the unemployed are even more limited than those of pensioners, yet they are denied any rent allowance or supplementary allowance. If the Government is seriously concerned with adequate provision for those who are worse off in our society, there is need for supplementary assistance, that is, rent assistance for the long term unemployed.
The unemployed secure only a health care card. They do not get a pensioner health benefit card as do other pensioner groups. That means that all the unemployed can get is concessional provision on pharmaceuticals. That is, the unemployed are required to pay $2 per prescription whereas a person who has a pensioner health benefit card receives free pharmaceuticals. Again, the income levels to be eligible for health care cards and the income levels to be eligible for pensioner health benefit cards are very similar. Why should they not receive similarity of treatment in relation to pharmaceutical benefits? Why should there be a discrimination between two groups of people who are roughly in the same income situation, as is provided through these provisions. Whilst we appreciate that an effort has been made to provide the unemployed with concessional provision of pharmaceuticals, it still leaves open the question: Why should they not be treated in exactly the same way as our pensioners who have pensioner health benefit cards?
Again we find that the unemployed are discriminated against when compared with other

Social Welfare

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 845

pensioners if we look at fringe benefits. Most of the range of fringe benefits available to pensioners are generally denied to the unemployed. Certainly they are denied by the Commonwealth, although in some cases this is modified by generosity on the part of some States. Examples are hearing aid concessions, motor registration rebates, rate reductions, transport concessions and fuel bill relief. These fringe benefits which are provided for many pensioners just do not apply to the unemployed. They are, as somebody has said, kinds of nonpersons when we come to the fringe benefit area. No pensioner pays tax on spouse or children's allowances but the unemployed are taxed on these allowances. Indeed, an unemployed family which earns nothing during a year but has three or more children will be taxed simply because there are children. I think it must be difficult for any member of the Government to defend this contrast between the provision for pensioners and the provision, in this case, for the long term unemployed.
I simply stress to the Government the importance and urgency of rectifying these anomalies and discriminations. That is becoming even more urgent because of the accelerating rate of unemployment. We now have on record the Treasurer (Mr Howard), the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) and the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) all indicating that unemployment levels will rise in this society. It is not just a problem of school leavers not being able to get into the work force. Increasingly, families are having to live on the unemployment benefit because their breadwinners are facing redundancy and sackings en masse. It is already agreed by most commentators that the Budget figures on unemployment are fudged. Only a week has passed since the Budget was introduced but it is generally accepted that the figures in relation to the unemployed, and particularly in relation to the cost of the unemployment benefit, are rubbery figures. Indeed, we would argue that those unemployment benefit figures are underestimated by $300m. Already, of course, unemployment has gone through the 400,000 barrier at a time of the year when employment is usually looking up. What sorts of figures will we be faced with in February or March of next year? -1 strongly warn the Government that these anomalies and discriminations in the treatment of the unemployed will become more acute in the coming year.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (5.36)-1 welcome the announcements made in the Budget in support of the needy and those important groups in the community whom we ought to support. There are many new initiatives which will be of real help to large numbers in the community. The Budget recognises the needs. It also recognises the views widely held by many Government members. In particular, I am very pleased to see the help provided in the Budget for families and pensioners.
This Budget increases the family allowance for the first two children by 50 per cent. This Government is committed to the family. It is an area we must support. It is a vital part of our community which I hope we would all agree must be given every support and encouragement. The family is worth supporting, not just as a worthwhileindeed vital-institution but also as the best and often the most effective means of dealing with many of the problems which this community faces. The family allowance is a payment of great significance. It recognises the value of the family in this community. It is said that it assists those who have means as well as those who are without means. I suppose that is true. But insofar as it is a direct cash payment it unquestionably supports and helps most those who most need it. It is in fact, a transfer payment from those who do not have children to those who do. It recognises the greater obligation and cost of maintaining children. I am glad to see that in the Budget it is the first and second children who are recognised; it is in respect of those children that the increases relate. The average Australian family, I suppose, these days would be a one or two child family.
Mr McLean-Some have more.
Mr HARRIS-Some have more, that is true, but most of us have two, or, as in my own case, three. The reality and the common experience is that the first child is the most expensive. It is the one that leads to the setting up expenses in the home. The others tend to get a certain measure of hand-me-downs. The birth of the first child is also normally the occasion upon which the wifecertainly these days-ceases employment. It is the moment of greatest need in the family. Therefore, the family allowance ought to be recognised as the allowance which needed increasing. The Budget and the Government have this year done that. I welcome it. I hope that in succeeding years further increases will be weighted in favour of the first and second child as they involve the greatest cost impact and payments in this area, I believe, will do the most good. In addition to the increases in the family allowance, from May 1983 a tax free family income supplement for low income families, apart from pensioners and beneficiaries, of up

846 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Social Welfare

to $10 per week for each dependent child will be available. This measure reflects our concern for low income families who have responsibility for bringing up children. Low income families will also be assisted by a rise in the qualifying limits for
health cards which, as a result of the consumer price index increase and adjustments to the income test for the unemployment benefits, to which they are linked, will go up to $184 a week for a married couple plus $20 for each child in the
family.
One cannot discuss the help given in the Budget to families without referring to the changes in the taxation arrangements. The spouse rebate has been increased by $200, which is a significant help to single income families. There are other measures. The income tax exemption limit has been raised by $400. The standard rate of tax has been reduced from 32 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar. These measures will have a significant benefit for the average family. For example, the family of a single income earner earning about the average income of $320 a week with two dependent children will be $15 or so better off. A family earning $200 a week will be $24 better off. A family earning $184 a week will be $32 a week better off. That represents an 18.5 per cent increase in disposable income for such a family. Those figures indicate the value and the benefit of this Budget to families and also the weighting given to those who have family responsibilities and those who have average and lower incomes. Of course, all this is before taking into account the new tax rebate of 30 per cent on payments of home loan interest at rates above 10 per cent on loans up to $60,000. Interest rates, it is true, are high. Many average families have to pay significant interest bills and this rebate will be of great benefit to them.
The second area of real benefit I have mentioned is that of the pensioner. I begin by reminding the House that the decisions announced in the Budget complement the important measures first adopted in the 1976 Budget by the Fraser Government to protect and automatically cover against inflation most pensioners and beneficiaries who
receive the basic rate of pension by twice yearly adjustments to pension rates linked to consumer price index increases. It should be noted that this commitment is expensive. The November 1982 and May 1983 increases will cost about $770m in a full year. These regular adjustments are necessary for pensioners to meet inflation, but involve large sums of money. It should be remembered too that as time goes on the number of people receiving the age pension will increase. There are, however, several worthwhile additional measures

which have been announced in this Budget which are of real benefit, I believe, to pensioners. The allowable income limit has been increased from $20 a week to $30 a week for single pensioners which is a 50 per cent increase and from $34.50 a week to $50 a week for couples. The fringe benefit income test has also been increased. The income limit has been raised from $40 a week to $54 a week for a single pensioner and from $48.50 to $90 a week for a couple. There can be little doubt
that each of these measures is timely. The effect of inflation has eroded the value of the previous income limits.
It is sometimes said that affluent people are receiving the pension. If this is so, it is not the result of the previous income limits. People who, in fact, are well off and receive the pension have achieved this by having their means in a form which does
not attract the income test or, to put it another way, to which the income test cannot apply. Whether there are a large number of these people or not, there are people who are entitled to greater assistance and to whom these changes in the means test will apply. People who until now have been receiving, say, $40 a week in private income in addition to the pension have suffered disability or loss. There can be no doubt of that. I am very glad that by these measures we have done something to improve their lot significantly. They will also give recognition to those who have made a contribution to their own retirement and represent some incentive to them to continue to do so. They assist those pensioners who have part time work or some small superannuation policy.
I will give some examples of how this assists pen-
sioners. A single pensioner under 70 years of age, the most numerous class, earning $54 a week private income-income additional to the pensionwill in November be $11.53 a week better off and will also be entitled to fringe benefits. In November somebody with $40 a week private or additional income will be $12.26 a week better off, again with fringe benefits. Somebody receiving or earning $30 a week in addition to the pension will be $12.79 a week better off. That last person, of course, already has the pensioner benefit health card. Anybody can see from these examples that there have been significant advances for the aged and pensioners.
I mention the position of married aged pensioner couples under 70 for they too will benefit significantly from the changes introduced in this Budget. A couple who receive $90 a week additional income will in November be approximately $13 a week better off. Of course, they also now receive the fringe benefit of a health card. A couple with $50 a week additional income will be

Social Welfare

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 847

$14.36 a week better off and will receive the fringe benefit of a heallth card. A couple who are presently receiving $40 a week in additional income will be $15.81 a week better off in November. They, of course, would already be receiving the health benefit card.
There are, of course, other benefits in the Budget for the pensioner. A new tax rebate for pensioners has been introduced. This will be $167 this year and $250 next year. This year the rebate will be reduced by 12.5c for each dollar earned above $5,007. This step, combined with a $400 increase in the tax free threshold, will ensure that pensioners with a pension and no other income will pay no tax at all. The effect of these measures is that a pensioner can have a total income, including a pension, of $5,429 a year-over $100 a week-without having to pay any tax. As I have said, the rebate reduces at the rate of 12.5c, but it does not cut out until income of around $7000. As with the easing of the means test on pensions and on fringe benefits, these steps represent a real improvement for pensioners. They also represent both an incentive and a reward for people to provide, to the extent they are able, for their own retirement.
Further help for the pensioner is also provided in a new three-tiered arrangement for pharmaceutical benefits. Those pensioners who have the health benefit card will continue to receive medicines on the same basis. Of course, following the relaxation of the income test, more pensioners will be entitled to that card. In addition, other pensioners without the card will no longer pay the $3.20 a prescription as this has been reduced to $2 a prescription. This is real help to the pensioner, particularly the aged pensioner, who so frequently calls on medical assistance.
A final consideration with regard to help for the aged is the increase in funds available for aged persons accommodation and elderly citizen's centres. This too has been significantly increased. This Budget represents a package of measures which assist a great many people in the community. As I have said, I am very glad for the help provided to the pensioner. I am very glad for the help provided to the family, the basic and vital unit in our community. There are many other items in the Budget which time will not permit me to mention this evening, including help for the unemployed, the disabled and those people requiring child care services-all of which are worthy of mention. I have no doubt my colleagues will be mentioning them during the forthcoming debate on the Budget.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (5.50)-The ministerial statement canvassed a wide range of matters including the housing industry, unemployment, consumer price index increases, welfare payments, invalid pensions, child services, homeless youth, health care and so on. The Government has created the social welfare. This Government has created the unemployment crisis. This Government has caused the housing industry crisis. Any actions taken in this Budget have been taken, firstly, to try to reverse policies of this Liberal-National Country Party Government that are heading Australia towards economic and social disaster, and, secondly, in response to the constant calls of the Australian Labor Party for an end to these disastrous policies. Petition after petition in this House has sought some relief from the Fraser Government's policies. They have concerned interest rates, child care services, sales tax, survival of Community Youth Support Scheme projects and relief for the unemployed. Speech after speech by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and members of the Labor Party have sought relief from the economic hardships being imposed by this Government on the people of Australia.
Perhaps the most generous thing we could say of this ministerial statement is that it recognises the issues we on this side of the House have been raising since the Fraser Government was elected and imposed these policies on the people of Australia. The Government recognises the issues. One cannot go on to say that the Government has responded adequately or responsibly to the needs of the nation. This Liberal-Country Party Government is led by the Prime Minister, the Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, who said:
there will be jobs for those who want to work. We will abolish the Prices Justification Tribunal. We will establish a sound basis of economic responsibility. There will be no international safaris by members of Parliament.
Those are just some of the promises of the Fraser Government. Others include:
We will maintain Medibank, and ensure that the standard of health care does not decline.
Perhaps the lowest level ever reached in those promises was that made by the present leader of the Government when in 1977 he said:
Unemployment will fall from February and will continue to fall.
Mr Milton-Who said that?

848 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Social Welfare

Mr SCOTT-John Malcolm Fraser, the leader of the present Government. Those promises have been echoed in the community and they will never be believed again. The 1982-83 Budget clearly predicts a massive rise in the number of unemployed. Apart from those currently unemployed, one in every thirty of those now working will be unemployed by July 1983. These are the predictions of the present Budget. The statement of the Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security (Mr Wilson) totally ignores those infamous promises. Instead, there is a pathetic attempt to apply a coating of sugar to this bitter pill, this 1982-83 Budget. The Minister has said that the Government has recognised the problems in housing. Other speakers, including the shadow Minister, the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), will clearly expose the failure of the Government either to recognise properly or to deal properly with the problems of the home buyer or of the housing industry.
I will content myself with dealing with the serious problems of both the home buyer and the housing industry in South Australia in particular and the effects on that section of the community. I wish to show the Minister's failure in this state-
ment to understand those problems. It is often said that the housing crisis in Australia is the second greatest social tragedy after unemployment to have developed during the seven years of this Government. That statement is true and will remain so until the present Government is thrown out of office and the underlying ideological assumption which promotes anti-housing policy is dismissed from the domestic political agenda.
At present the bank interest rates for first home loans stand at 13.5 per cent, having risen from 9.5 per cent in March 1980. This represents an increase in money terms of $88 a month for an average $30,000 loan over 25 years. Many borrowers, however, seek credit at building societies. Here the national average charge is between 14 per cent and 16t per cent. In South Australia, the level at present is held at 14+ per cent despite significant pressure from the building societies. It is widely anticipated that Premier Tonkin will buckle under this pressure, and we can expect a rise in the near future. This rise will be of the order of at least I t per cent and probably 2 per cent. Those people forced to go to financial institutions for second mortgage loans are faced with increases in excess of 20 per cent.
First home buyers are finding it increasingly difficult to gain access to traditional forms of borrowing. A typical $30,000, 25-year loan requires a monthly repayment to a savings bank of $350. This requires a household income of at least I \0

per cent of average weekly male earnings. Such a requirement excludes 80 per cent of prospective home buyers. Only one buyer in five can meet such a target. The social cost of this virtually unbridled rate of increase is demonstrated by looking at the total debt connected with a typical $30,000, 25-year loan. In March 1980 the total debt on such a loan at an interest rate of 9t per cent was $78.630. It is now $\04,907. The tight monetary policies of this Government have added $26,277 to the individual debt on an average home loan-and it was done in just two years. This is an increase of just over one-third-33.4 per cent.
It is estimated that in the 1980s, because of natural population increases and the projected migrant intake, 160,000 new dwellings need to be constructed each year. The Fraser Government, far from reaching or even aiming at this necessary target, is backing away from it. In 1980-81, there were 149,000 new commencements. In the financial year just passed the figure was down to less than 130,000. This year it is estimated by the Housing Industry Association that new commencements will amount to only 117,000. This represents a shortfall in one year of 43,000 dwellings and a shortfall in the first three years of the decade of 85,000 dwellings. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 17 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley:-Leader of the Opposition) (8.0)-This Budget is a betrayal of the Australian people. The economy is out of control, sliding backwards into depression. Business has run into a brick wall. Our interest rates are the highest in the world. Record numbers of Australians cannot get work. Two million people are living in poverty. Consumer confidence is at its lowest for years. And all the Government can do is panic and run for it. Every year for seven years a Treasurer has stood up in this place like the boy on the burning deck and told us that, appearances aside, the good times were about to roll. This year the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has come into this House waving a white flag of surrender.
The economy will not grow this coming year. Unemployment will rise. Poverty will worsen. Interest rates will stay high. Inflation will increase. And the clowns who are supposed to have

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 849

the economy in hand have decided that it is all too hot to handle. For an hour and a half last Tuesday night the Treasurer talked his way around this point. Not once did he offer a word of apology for it to the people who are going to suffer as a result of the excesses of his Government's economic policies. Every Australian has the right to be outraged that this Government, which has the hide to suggest that it alone knows how to handle the economy, has run away from its obligations to deal fairly and honestly with the Australian people. It has offered a packet of goodies designed to make the bitter economic medicine go down. But the figures on which these goodies are based, as everybody knows, are shaky and shonky.
This Budget is an insult to the hundreds and thousands of Australians who have no jobs. It is an insult to the families and individuals who are struggling to make ends meet. It is an insult to working people who pay higher and higher taxes than any generation in Australia's history. It is an insult to those who expected that this would be the year when the Government finally got off its tail after seven years of windy promises which produced nothing but sustained personal suffering, social division, and economic failure. According to this Budget, the Government has given up all responsibility for seeing our stricken economy through 1982-83 and beyond. Instead, it has produced two myxomatosed rabbits out of its hat, a couple of scapegoats to blame for its failings and some concessions to compensate some Australians for the seven lean years they have been put through.
According to the Government, the reasons why, after seven years of promises, we are actually worse off are the demands of greedy wage earners and the downturn in the world economy. Such hypocrisy is astounding even for this Government. Wages are not just a cost to employers; they are a major source, usually the only source, of spending power by working Australians. Keeping wages down to unreasonable levels will actually destroy consumer demand and continue the paralysis of the economy. This is not going to help either employers or employment. In any case, despite what the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is saying, wage costs are now lower than they were when he took over. Figures dealing with real labour costs and labour productivity show that since 1975-76 real labour costs grew by II per cent and productivity by 12 percent.
I will not be so unkind as to say that the Prime Minister is tripping over the truth in a characteristic way. I will just say that he has not read his own Budget Papers, where these figures are

published. His complaints about wages are rank with hypocrisy. Wages can be a cause of inflation. So can other economic influences such as government charges for petrol, health insurance and sales taxes on essential commodities. The inflationary king hit has been largely coming from incompetent Government pricing policies. It is nonsense to offer wage restraint by corporate executives and public servants as an example to wage earners. Public servants earning $800 a week will not suffer if their salaries are limited to an increase of 7 per cent. But for an electrician on $250 a week wage rises equivalent to 4 per cent less than the rate of inflation are a disaster.
Let me make another point. The fact that we do not have a systematic wages policy is not the fault of wage earners or their unions. For five years the Government undermined our centralised wage fixing system. It managed finally to -destroy it. It was warned about the consequences by employers and employees alike. It wanted market forces in wage fixing and it got them. Now it is bleating. Wages have to be weighed and planned for in an orderly system in which relevant factors have their place. Wages, non-wage incomes, taxes, social security programs and prices all have a role in economic planning. That is the central point to the arrangment that the Australian Labor Party has reached with the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Until we can get all these relevant factors into a proper rational relationship we will never restore order and predictability to economic management. The prices and incomes policy that we offer will be the point from which the economy will progress in a systematic, non-inflationary fashion.
Mr Howard-Ha, hal
Mr HAYDEN-The people who are experts in failure find that hard to swallow. Look at their record. There is one starting point where we will not make a mistake. We will not do what they are doing. It will be the central part of the planning process which we will set up with the highest possible priority. In that planning process all who have a stake in economic decision makingwill have their place. By that I mean employees, employers, national and State governments. This is why we have been arguing that a prices and incomes policy is crucial to a well-run economy. Countries rated by the World Bank as above us in a per capita income scale, such as West Germany, Austria and some of the Scandinavian countries, consider -a prices and incomes arrangement to be an essential element of economic management. That, of course, is why the Prime Minister is so upset with our pact with the trade union movement. He has been caught shooting his mouth off or, if

850 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

honourable members prefer, he has been caught with his pants down, alienating the people he needs and getting nowhere. Alleged tax cuts that leave Australian families no better off than last year and worse off than the year before are not a wages-prices policy. There is no action on the non-wages front, none on the prices and the tax cuts are just not real.
Mr Dean-Oh, that is not right.
Mr HAYDEN-They are an indexation adjustment to offset inflation by the highest taxing government in our history. The tax cuts will arrive as reliable as the amounts of money outstanding to the local government instrumentality to which the honourable member is indebted. The Prime Minister's second scapegoat is the world economy.
Mr Dean-We are catching up on your spending.
Mr HAYDEN-We will pay our way. The honourable member should not worry. It is true that overseas trends have their effect here. We discovered that when we were affected by the downturn overseas from such developments as the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries price rise. Those were the days-I have quoted this many times before-when the Prime Minister was claiming: 'When political leaders say that the present situation cannot be helped, that it is part of a world situation, they are expressing the futility of their own leadership'. On his record there is no more futile leadership than that of the Prime Minister in that case.
Mr Carlton-He did you last time. He will do you the next time too.
Mr HAYDEN-Only by a cat's whisker; next time we will trample over him. They pay on a nose or the length of a straight; it does not matter. The Prime Minister really ought to learn that those who take the credit for the rain should not be surprised when they get the blame for the drought. But we will not rub that in tonight. Sure, times are tough overseas and it does not make economic management easier at home but it should not mean that economic management is impossible, as the Government concludes. It should not mean that nothing can be done about it but to cut and run, as the Government has done. Australia has so many resources that many countries which are victims of world economic circumstances do not have-mineral resources, natural resources and an ample, highly skilled and diligent work force when it is properly led; but it lacks national leadership. Australia has been well served for years by the co-operation between the private and public sectors. Good government

management has seen us through some hard times before. Ask the National Country Party members opposite. When the going gets tough they are more interventionist than Stalin himself.
If we had used this system responsibly and sensitively for the past seven years we would not be in the sorry mess we are in today. We certainly would have been able to protect ourselves from the worst effects of the world economic situation. In its time this Government has abused many people and groups for causing its problems-the so-called dole bludgers and bureaucrats, Neville Wran and John Cain, and now Ronald Reagan and Cliff Dolan. I have noticed after more than 20 years in this business-
Mr Howard-That is a good quinella.
Mr HAYDEN-Obviously the Minister did not think of it. I have noticed after more than 20 years in this business that blaming other people and ordering them about is the last resort of politicians who have run out of ideas of their own. Maybe it is emotionally satisfying. It may even be politically advantageous. But as a substitute for effective action it is as useful as counting angels on the point of a pin. The nearest this Budget comes to effective action is its packet of goodies-the Government's decision to give back some of the money from taxes it has been ripping off us for the past seven years. This is the give and take part of the Budget, the concessions that the Government plans to give now and take back later, as it did in 1977.
The Labor Party welcomes these concessions, limited, belated and cynical though they may be. After all the shattered promises of the last seven years the least the Government can do is to compensate Australians in part for the rough time it has given them. We have been urging the Government to grant this compensation for a long time. Its inclusion in the Budget is a most important factor in our decision that the Budget should be passed by both Houses. I want to make an unambiguous declaration about this because the Prime Minister seems to have trouble taking it in. I will say it slowly; I cannot get it all down to monosyllables for him. We adhere to the long-standing principle and convention that the Budget, and all those pieces of legislation which make up the Budget package, should not be obstructed in the upper House. The Labor Party wants proper and decent standards of behaviour maintained in this Parliament, not the corrupted levels of the Harry M. Millers of the political system. Even though we are anxious that the people get some of the compensation they deserve, they should not be

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 851

misled into thinking that it is as much as they deserve.
The sole positive point in the Budget is neither as positive nor as bountiful as the Government says it is. The Prime Minister, of course, calls it 'significant'. That is a word he uses a lot and which he makes mean a lot, depending on the time and the circumstances. He even suggested it would compensate working Australians if they forgo wage justice, but as I have said many times the wise person will watch the Prime Minister's hands, not his mouth. These concessions will cost the Government just over $1900m but the Government will claw back more than half of it through higher indirect taxes and charges, and, what is more, the higher taxes and charges are operating now, but the concessions will have to wait until November at the earliest.
One simple statistic exposes the fraudulent nature of the Government's concessions. Taxes this year, at an estimated 25.7 per cent of gross domestic product, are about the same as last year, and last year was the record holder. How can the public respect a Government which says that it is concerned about people and yet plays such shabby games with them? A patient would be justified in feeling a bit upset with the medic if, as fast as the blood was being pumped into his arm, it was being syphoned out of his leg. That is how many people will feel when they see through this latest government quackery. That is how many people will react when they find out that the greatest benefit of the tax concessions will go, not to the average family the Treasurer keeps talking about, but to above average salary earners. That is how many pensioners will feel when they find out that the concessions promised to them will favour not the battlers the Prime Minister is suddenly worried about but those who have incomes over and above the pension.
The Government will certainly hear more about these matters as time passes. I want to make only one more point about them. This is an example of how far the Government will go to stir expectations at the lowest possible cost to itself. Even here when it deceives working people who have done this Government no harm, it cannot stop itself from using shonky figures. The average family that the Treasurer talks about will be good and mad when it finds that its living standards will not rise by $16 a week because of these concessions; not at all. As the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) illustrated so graphically last week, the typical married couple, with two children, on average weekly earnings will be only $3.90 better off each week. That will buy them four more loaves of bread each week. Big deal! If

the Treasurer cannot visualise that, let me put it in terms that he will understand. His average family will just have enough extra money to buy two more avocados a week. In other words, that is an improvement of one per cent in that family's spending power in a year when inflation is going up by 11 per cent.
Mr Howard~ Pause for a joke. That was a joke.
Mr HAYDEN~ No, all the jokes are in front of me, I am afraid. This cynical deceit is better than nothing, except that lifting dishonesty to such a high art form corrupts and corrodes the values of the Government just as it undermines and destroys its credibility. It is not what working families deserve after the treatment handed out to them over the past seven years. After all, these are not gifts that the Government is giving out. Families should not have to be grateful for the grudging concessions the Government has allowed in this Budget. This relief is the people's by right; they have earned it. They have paid record amounts of tax for it. What have they got in return? They have insec'urity about work for themselves and their children; mortgages and rents going up and up and prices for everyday necessities climbing higher and higher. The only profitable growth industries the Government allows to flourish are tax avoidance and criminal tax evasion. Liberal Party State offices have become the focus of a dial-a-tax evader service for the nation. Anything working Australians get from this Budget in the way of relief they have earned many times over. If honourable members opposite imagine that the voters are going to rush the barricades to thank the Government because they can now afford another packet of washing powder a week they underestimate the people.
I now turn to that part of the Budget that explains how the Government would manage the economy in the foreseeable future if it had not run away to hide in its funkhole. The economic circumstances, said the Treasurer, 'make the framing of this Budget by far the most difficult since the present Government took office'. What'are those circumstances? The Treasurer stated:
The international recession is now hitting us hard. Our overseas markets have shrunk. Economic growth has faltered. Unemployment is rising. Inflation remains far too high. Interest rates are hurting many of us.
I remind the House that all this is after seven years of the Government which said it would bring us prosperity, defeat inflation and provide jobs for all. What future does the Government see? Under its management inflation will remain high. There will be no growth in farm and nonfarm production. Investment in business and

852 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

especially private home building will decline. Personal spending will stagnate. Employment will not grow. Unemployment will rise. Last year's severe balance of payments problems will continue. A current account deficit of $9 billion will need greater inflows of private capital. This will lead to more pressure on the exchange rate. To attract this capital and to keep some of the $10 billion that came here last year, interest rates will have to stay high. These high interest rates have already done immense harm to many Australians. When rates in the United States of America were rising, the Government told us that ours had to rise too because American rates were going up. Now American rates are declining and ours are set to climb again. I repeat: They are the highest in the world according to the respected Syntec International Pty Ltd publication. They are climbing, in fact, right off the top of the latest Syntec graph.
The Government is banking on a contribution of $1.5 billion from the balance of payments-
partly offset by the projected domestic budget surplus-to keep the growth of money supply down to between 9 per cent and 11 per cent. This, together with problems with the balance of payments, will put even more pressure on interest rates. So will the projected increase in inflation. The effect of those higher interest rates will be to close the circle of disaster. It will discourage the already flattened rate of spending by business and consumers.
Sales of motor vehicles-already on the slide according to Martec Pty Ltd, the motor vehicle industry forecasting organisation-are to be hit even harder by the increases in sales taxes and fuel charges. The one-off lift in spending on public housing will not compensate the building industry for the horrendous recession in home construction. The increase in unemployment is expected by the Government to be between 2 per cent and 3 per cent-another 130,000 to 190,000 on top of the 470,000 already out of work.
This is the litany of woe that we are given after seven years of promises. What does this Budget propose should be done about it? Where are the measures that will turn our economy around or even arrest the slide that the Treasurer foresees? The short answer is: The Budget offers nothing. The Government boasts about its planned domestic surplus as though it were going to help. It will actually make things worse. Here is the economy roaring downhill. Everybody involved is screaming for help. What is the Government going to do? It is going to take out of the economy $230m more than it is putting in. It is unbelievable. It is putting one's foot on the accelerator as one approaches the cliff edge.

That is no blueprint for economic change. It is John Howard's black hole. It must be there somewhere but nobody can see it. The only possible relief is the suspicion that the Treasurer's broad estimates are wrong. Lord knows, so many of his projections are rubbery. In fact, they are downright shonky. His version of the effects of his concessions looks pretty elastic. Much of the wherewithal for these concessions is expected to come from the Government's so-called blitz on tax cheating. Commentators describe this proposition as, at best, dubious and, most likely, ludicrous. We call it ridiculous.
The tax system is riddled 'with rorts. The Government boasts of its eradication plans. But the fact is that the tax cheats have increased 2,500 per cent in the first five years of this Government's stewardship. That is just the rorting that we know about. There would be a lot more if the Labor Party had not made it such an issue. The McCabe-Lafranchi report described some hundreds of cases in Melbourne alone. The New South Wales Government is said to have a version of its own which is as shocking as the Victorian report. The Australian Taxation Office is deeply concerned at the spread of devices to cheat on sales taxes.
The Liberal Party in the Cook electorate had its tax avoidance scheme and, for all we know, it is being repeated by the Liberals in other electorates in the Treasurer's bailiwick of New South Wales. The National Party in Queensland was touting its own tax avoidance scheme only a few days ago. People named in the McCabe-Lafranchi report represent this Government on various boards and commissions and within the ranks of its own party. Half the members opposite are determined to stop the Government from doing a proper eradication job, The Premier and the Liberal Party in Western Australia are helping them. Four years ago, the Treasurer promised measures to eradicate evasion through cash payments, especially in the building industry. The measures certainly have appeared for the first time with this Budget. The only reason they are there is because the Government could no longer ignore community pressure and disgust.
Mr Donald Cameron-Are you against those cash payments?
Mr HAYDEN-No, but it does not take me four years to make up my mind, Four years ago the Treasurer announced that he would introduce measures to prevent international tax avoidance through tax havens. The havens remain virtually untouched, safe as ever, four years later. Even the new housing proposals in this Budget seem, on the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 853

face of it, to provide opportunities to rort the system. How many working Australians who are paying the highest personal taxes in history take the Government at its word? How can they trust the Government to stamp out the tax cheats when the tax cheats are running around its feet like cockroaches? With this record the Government cannot blame us for being quite sceptical.
So how will the Government pay for its concessions before it rips them back? The Budget estimates are so rubbery that they bounce all over the place like a cheque from Keith Compton Gale who is well known to the Prime Minister.
Spending on unemployment benefits is probably understated by $300m. The home interest rate rebate will probably cost $70m more than the estimate. The revenue target of $615m through penalties on late payment of tax could be out by as much as $400m. The health rebate will probable cost about $150m more than is estimated. The revenue from the tobacco excise is said to be understated by about $65m, according to newspaper reports only this morning. These estimates are so thin the Budget will fall apart within months. No wonder the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) does not want to be associated with the Treasury and no wonder the Treasury does not want to be caught too near the Government's estimates. They are so dubious that this Budget is just about irrelevant to any sensible discussion about the state of the economy. This is tragic because the state of the economy-present and potential-is disastrous.
Let me deal with some positive propositions we have. Our plan of rescue in the short term would aim at a prudent level of expansion in the economy. This would be appropriate to the circumstances and genuinely fair to those who will do the work that pulls the economy around. A domestic deficit of $1 billion to $1.5 billion-equivalent to much less than one per cent of gross domestic product-would have major multiplier effects throughout the economy. Within these limits, Labor's program has been carefully assessed for its maximum impact on getting the economy moving and employment rising. It would include an employment policy that would directly boost job opportunities by about 150,000 in the public and private sectors; increased spending on capital works on overdue social and economic infrastructure programs in co-operation with state and local government; a boost to the public housing rental stock and associated community services; and genuine tax cuts and associated measures aimed at making up the decline in family living standards. A Budget deficit could be financed by a net addition to money supply financed by Treasury bills

bought by the Reserve Bank of Australia. We would aim at limiting growth in money supply to between II per cent and 13 per cent. This would be firm enough. It would also accommodate faster growth and ease pressure on interest rates. In association with our 'prices and incomes policy it would do so without adding to inflation.
We totally disagree with the Government's policy of keeping interest rates up to attract capital inflow with which to finance the current account deficit. This pressure on interest rates should be eased in two ways. First, the dollar should be devalued by five per cent-a figure which the markets think is sensible and rational. Second, we should have an overseas borrowing program to maintain adequate foreign reserves. In this way we would establish a floor of confidence under the exchange rate. These borrowings would be temporary, repayments being made as the trade sector gains ground. The employment program is designed to create directly about 150,000 job opportunities. More jobs would result from the increased spending power from these otherwise unemployed people and in the industries supplying the materials for the projects on which they have been employed. Our public housing program alone would involve spending an extra $170m in 1982-83, bringing the base level of Commonwealth funding up to $500m. Every $IOOm spent on the building industry creates 5,000 jobs. Accordingly, our proposal will provide 8,500 new jobs in that area alone. More jobs would come from Labor's proposals for bridging the deposit gap for first home buyers and boosting the flow of affordable housing finance.
Our proposal for a genuine increase in family living standards through tax reform, cheaper health insurance and a new improved retirement scheme would directly bolster consumer spending. The details of these programs will be issued in the near future by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the honourable member for Kingsford Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), the honourable member for Gellibrand, the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) and other colleagues here and in the other place-the most active and creative front bench this Parliament has seen in years. I notice the Vice-President of the Executive Council (Sir James Killen) applauding. He is the first Minister for nothing we have had in the Parliament. Our proposals envisage non-farm' gross domestic product growing at a rate of 4 per cent in 1983. The confidence that they would stimulate plus our medium term measures for industrial renewal are aimed at putting Australia back on to a

854 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

sustainable annual growth of about 5 per cent per year.
It has to be said that the task of halving unemployment to 4 per cent would be a long and hard one, taking several years. Even so, a growing economy would help lower the cost of expansionary activities. Halving unemployment in that period, for instance, would mean more than $2,000m additional revenue in unemployment benefit saved and taxes paid from the currently unemployed being put back into productive work for Australia. If one thing is needed in this country today it is to put Australia back to work the way it used to work. One thing is certain: We have to get out of this rut into which the Government has dumped the nation.
Mr Anthony---That is what Joh Petersen says.
Mr HAYDEN-The crepuscular mentality of the Deputy Prime Minister is brought to bear again. The no-growth policies of the Government have cost us dearly. In the 10 years to 1975 the annual growth rate averaged 5 per cent. If that had continued since then gross domestic product this year would be $200,000m instead of $160,000m. In other words, 20 per cent of our potential wealth is lying idle this year as a direct consequence of a succession of Government policies. That is a cost equivalent of $50 a head per week or $170 per famiiy per week. No wonder Australia has shot down the World Bank rankings of per capita income. We were the ninth richest nation in the world seven years ago. We are the sixteenth richest now and falling, thanks to the geniuses opposite. The World Bank's rankings, by the way, are dominated by nations with democratic socialist forms of governmentgovernments, that is, which recognise the importance of prices and incomes policies as crucial elements of economic management. West Germany and Austria are obvious examples, both incidentally enjoying much lower unemployment and inflation than we have. Despite the mess created by its inflation first strategy, the Government's deliberate actions have put 2 per cent on inflation each year. Imagine a government that claims to be fighting inflation first adopting policies that increase costs and impose an extra 2 per cent on inflation each year! By these actions I mean petrol and sales taxes, higher excise, more expensive health insurance and the crunch imposed on statutory authorities and State government funds.
The prices and incomes arrangement we have with the trade union movement, as it unfolds through further negotiation, will tolerate none of these stupid contradictions. Its objective is that

growth in wages will not exceed growth in productivity plus inflation and, indeed, will be kept within guidelines at all times dictated by sensible economic management. In return, rational programs will improve the social wage and set up mechanisms to reduce price pressures such as a pricing authority and an effective Trade Practices Commission. We will reduce our over-reliance on inflationary and regressive indirect taxes and government charging practices. Our monetary
and fiscal policies will be meshed into our prices and incomes policy. By the end of 1983 such integrated action would have inflation down to 8 per cent and falling. It would be consistent with, and helpful to, our objective of bringing down the highest interest rates in the world.
I have spent some time detailing this short term rescue plan for a good reason. If it helps the Government out of its present paralysis, it is welcome to try it. This is no time to be exclusiveeven with fools. The country is in too great a mess. If the Government follows the line that Labor has offered tonight it will have our co-operation. But Australia faces longer term developments which, in my view, are not helped by the form that these Budgets take. Every year at this time we are so busy fighting over the details of one year's program that we do not have the time to consider what is ahead of us. The year 2000 will be on us so quickly that none of us can say that we are ready for it. We have to understand what this lack of vision must do to those we seek to lead and to the young people growing up after them. We are beyond the tinkering and fine tuning that go on in our Budget deliberations. Australia needs a new outlook altogether, a search over the horizon for the ideas that will prepare us for a complicated future. This means that we should be approaching present policies and present ways of doing things with fresh and sceptical eyes and a start must be made now. We should, for instance, have a clearer, more objective vision of our place and role in the area in which we live. The careful bromide that we got in the Harries report on Australia and the Third World will not do. I have in mind a much tougher minded and more realistic view-a regional strategy.
It is a fact that the world's most impressive growth rates are taking place in the south, east, South East Asia and the Pacific region. These are areas in which we are still insular aliens and often resented for it. If we want to survive as a community with high living standards, we will have to hook into the economic developments taking place there. These are potential markets not only for our meat and other high cost food where markets with our traditional trading partners are

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 855

declining, but also for our processed metals and manufactures. We have to work out much more carefully than we have up to now the forms in which we relate to these areas economically as well as politically. Closer economic relations with south, east, South East Asian and Pacific countries would bring immense opportunity for our growth as well as theirs. They would also force less structural change on our economy than growth based more narrowly on the export of energy minerals.
This connects with another long range develop-
ment we have only played with so far. I refer to structural change in our manufacturing industry. Industry cannot sustain us using its traditional modes and patterns of production. The Labor Party has been carefully drawing up a framework of policy planning that aims at a much more enabling role for industry by the Government. It should involve a more active Department of Industry and Commerce which would have direct planning links with strategic corporations, for example, and would key them into the planning councils that we will set up. If for no other reason than our proposed regional strategy, protection must be lowered progressively. But we are totally at one with the authoritative view of the Crawford Study Group on Structural Adjustment about this; that is, it cannot be done while unemployment remains a problem. This leads to another long range development for which Australia is unprepared. It cannot be done without effective manpower and capital policies. We argue a great deal over the pros and cons of keeping young people at their studies, to keep them off a chronically stagnant job market. But now is the time we should be planning changes to the structure of these studies so that our young people are educated and prepared for a future that we older people can scarcely imagine.
The Commonwealth and the States argue constantly over who is responsible for further education at a time when 70 per cent of the world's industrial robots are at work 24 hours a day in Japan. We argue about how best we can get industry moving again in the short term, presumably along its traditional path, producing its traditional goods in its traditional ways. But now is the time when we should be preparing the mechanisms which will stimulate research and development, which in turn will fit our technological base for a future which already exists in Europe and Japan. Ideological blinkers ought not to prevent a creative and productive partnership in this area between the public and private sectors.
We have a system of sharing power between the national and State governments that has not

really changed for a generation or more and which is bogged down in the traditional political haggling. In the meantime, our infrastructure is seizing up. It is a victim of the political system, choking like a dinosaur. This is one of the reasons why I have convened a meeting in a few weeks with all Labor Premiers and Labor leaders. In the new year we will have more Premiers at Labor's meeting than the Liberals will be able to claim at any convention of theirs. A start has to be made on a profound problem. If the leadership is not forthcoming from this Government, it will come from us. The Government haggles over details of social and economic programs in a political structure which ignores the new pressures that are already emerging. I am thinking of a whole range of new challenges to the system: The breakdown of the traditional nuclear family, for instance; the demands for devolution; and the growth of corporations into huge bureaucracies, with the familiar bureaucratic inertia and the familiar bureaucratic grasp for power.
While these new ways are ready to swamp us, we are here arguing over whether unions cause inflation and whether young people out of work should or can survive on $40 a week. While the future is rushing towards us the Government is turning away from it. We have only to look at the way in which the Government is organised. The portfolios dealing with science, technology, transport, communications, defence support and the environment are all non-Cabinet portfolios. Their Ministers are outside the centre of power. Their Ministers may well deserve it but the portfolios do not. We will pay dearly one day for this refusal to adapt. More importantly, those who come after us will have to pay for this lack of foresight and leadership.
I have one final point to make. It should be kept in mind while we are discussing the present and future of Australians in this debate.
Mr ColemanYour followers are asleep.
Mr HAYDEN-One scarcely notices the difference. There is a calculating air about our societies these days which is poisoning our country. We see it in the proliferation of tax rorting. People involved in it are honoured and kept on as Government representatives on public bodies. People responsible for it live lives of luxury, untouched by the law, and even lionised as rogue heroes. Occasionally, these rogue heroes get what they deserve. Even then they attract devoted attention on visiting days from one of the highest public figures in the country. We have a Prime Minister who is notorious for his 'life was not meant to be easy' philosophy, yet we have

856 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

never had a leader who has pampered himself more unashamedly. In his seven years he has given himself more overseas trips than any.other Prime Minister, more than the last five Prime Ministers combined and more than in the 16 years during which Sir Robert Menzies made his regular pilgrimages to Lords and Buckingham Palace. While companies are laying off workers all over the country, the Prime Minister has built up his personal staff to the biggest in our history. It will cost us nearly $800,000 this year-nearly 50 per cent more than last year. While homeless people were scratching through garbage cans for scraps, the Prime Minister happily spent $18m on the pomp and ceremony of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting last year-$6m more than was planned.
Meanwhile, working Australians soldier on, paying far more tax than is fair. The number of people living in poverty is as high as in the soup kitchen days of the 1930s. Too many families rely on supermarket specials for their food and welfare agencies for their clothes. Too many Australians have no security in their jobs or accommodation. When they ask for a fairer share of the national cake, they get the tripe kicked out of them for being greedy. Task forces of bureaucrats persecute invalid pensioners and lone parents. God help you if you are a Greek pensioner. The dole that allows young people to live for a week in graceless austerity would not buy a lunch for two at the restaurant across the road from this House.
I am not saying that the community leaders in this Parliament are entirely responsible for this atmosphere. I am not saying that they are entirely to blame for the way these double standards have been encouraged. But the tone of our national behaviour is set here in our national Parliament. When it comes to setting Australians an example of how society should operate fairly, the buck stops here. We cannot expect Australians to live in harmony and co-operation when the nation's affairs are conducted as they are by this confrontationist and unbelievable government. If the normal rules of decency are kicked to bits here in this Parliament by the Government, they will not be respected out in the real world. If confrontation, lies, false promises and abuse are the norm on the part of the Government, they will become the norm in the whole community. Let me remind the House that the greatest and most decent leader this country ever had was Ben Chifley. He once said:
There is a cynical belief in many sections of the community that politicians will promise anything in order to gain power. Unfortunately, some politicians will do so. Yet all of us have a great national responsibility. I've never been able to bring myself-in politics or elsewhere-to make rosy promises

which, in my own heart, I knew were not true or could not be given effect.
That was Ben Chifley who might well have won his last election if he had stooped to the attitudes that prevail at the head of national affairs today. This country is going through tough times. There is no point in denying that. Australians will have to work their way through these troubles. We did it after two devastating world wars and a crippling depression, struggling in co-operation and comradeship for national renewal and reconstruction. We owe it to ourselves to restore a nation whose potential rewards are so enormous and to make sure that these rewards are shared out fairly. We owe it to those Australians who have worked so hard before us and to the Australians who are coming after us. This country was once a prosperous, decent and a fair place in which to live. We can make it so again.
We in the Australian Labor Party believe, as Ben Chifley believed, that this national Parliament should be the place from which the leadership should come. We believe this Parliament has the great responsibility to give a lead to the people by being honest with them and treating them with respect. If the Government trusts the people, the people will trust the Government. This is the way Australia will become once more a fair-minded and civilised society; not by the defeatist and small-minded attitudes exemplified by this Budget, but by national leadership which is progressive, forceful and above all, but beyond this Government, honest. We condemn this destructive Budget.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (8.48)-That must surely be the most pathetic reply that has ever been delivered in this Parliament to a Budget Speech. The Australian people were quite entitled to hear from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) as to what his alternative Budget would be but they have heard absolutely nothing to that effect. They have heard no specific proposals with respect to taxation, social welfare and the way in which an alternative government would raise revenue. We heard nothing more than vague, generalised promises and the most enticing promise of all-that is, that the details would come from the most active and creative front bench that this Parliament has seen in years. The front bench of the Australian Labor Party was so active and creative that it spent most of the parliamentary recess undermining the Leader of the Opposition and trying to get rid of him. What an active and creative front bench indeed it was. We have heard from the Leader of the Opposition that there will be a deficit of between $1 billion and $1.5 billion.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 857

There is plenty of scope to manoeuvre there! He said that the deficit could vary by $500m; a variation of a mere half a billion dollars.
Then we heard the same tired old socialist proposals on job creation, the same proposals that Labor put into practice when it was in government between 1972 and 1975. What was the result of those job creation schemes, as it called them? The result was that employment in this country actually declined. On one of the very few occasions in its entire history did employment in this country actually drop. That was the time when the so-called job creation schemes were in full flight. They were an absolute failure because not only did employment drop but also did unemployment double during the time when the Labor Party implemented those programs. They were a failure then and they would be a failure again.
The Australian people are quite entitled to say to themselves tonight, having heard the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, that the Australian Labor Party has no alternative Budget; it has no alternative proposals; it has nothing that can help this country from economic difficulties and troubles; it has nothing that can give the Australian people any confidence whatsoever.
There are two basic principles upon which this Budget is based. The first principle is to create the right foundations for economic growth and particularly for employment growth. The second principle is to provide reasonable social welfare assistance for those who need that assistance and who are unable fully to care for themselves without some assistance from the Government. Let us look at each of those two principles in turn.
With respect to the first principle, there is no doubt that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) summed up the situation accurately and concisely in the Budget Speech when he said:
The plain, inescapable fact is that Australia has priced herself out of many world markets.
For example, last year wage levels in this country grew by some 3 or 4 per cent more than the rate of inflation. By comparison recent wage settlements in West Germany, the United States and the United Kingdom, countries that rank among our major trading partners, have been around or less than the rates of inflation in those countries.
The Treasurer went on to say:
Unless our relative performance is improved, our living standards will suffer.
That is the way the Treasurer put it, accurately and concisely. There is no doubt that the Treasurer was absolutely correct in making those statements. Australia has priced herself out of some world markets and will continue to do so until we come to realise that the cost of our labour is making the goods that we produce in this

country too expensive for them to be sold on world markets. Other countries have woken up to that fact and have adjusted their policies accordingly.
Let me give a clear example, which I observed
myself in Europe earlier this year. In West Germany, the Government, the trade unions and the employers sat down for the annual round of wage fixing discussions. As they approached the problem logically, they started off with an assessment that the likely rate of inflation for the following 12 months would be about 5 per cent. Accordingly, they agreed upon wage increases of 4-!- per cent-in other words, less than the inflation rate. And how logical that is; how sensible it is: What a contrast it is to the way we seem to approach these problems in Australia where the only guiding principle for those seeking wage increases seems to be to squeeze out of the system whatever they can get and to hell with the consequences. Unfortunately, there are too many people in the community who seem to have no regard for the effect on employment of excessive wage increases. Until they come to have that understanding, we will continue to pay ourselves as a nation more than we deserve and more than we are entitled to. Our goods will continue to be more expensive than the world market will bear. We will not be able to expand our markets overseas and our employment numbers will shrink. Those trying to sell into a market, who demand higher prices than the market will pay, will sell nothing. Their sales will shrink; so will the number of people making goods for which there is no market also shrink.
Let me return to my own experiences of what I observed in Europe earlier this year. I attended an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development conference of employment Ministers and listened for several days to the experiences from their countries. It became very clear indeed that there are two basic things about employment that we can learn and which we need to understand and put into practice. The first is that employers will employ people if it is profitable to do so. We must therefore make our industry more profitable if we expect industry to employ more people in this country. The whole Budget strategy is designed towards that very end and we must have a total commitment from the community in support of that principle. The second thing that I learned is that employers will employ people if those who are offering themselves for employment have something real and substantial to offer-in other words, if they have the skills, ability and training that the employer needs to do the job. Employers will not employ people as an act of charity or an act of grace; they will employ

858 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

people if the people who are offering for employment have the skills that are needed. It is for that reason that this Budget so rightly places so much emphasis on employment and training programs. The Budget should be supported for this reason alone, even without any more justification.
Under the Budget there will be more scope for unemployed young people to obtain the work experience and job skills that they need to make themselves more employable. Expenditure on work experience, for instance, will be increased by 37 per cent. This will allow for more than 74,000 new work experience places. There will also be substantial increases in Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training rebates to encourage more apprentices to be employed. In total, $84m will be paid out under the CRAFT scheme. This will provide assistance for 111,000 apprentices this year. I cannot emphasise too much the importance of those work experience and training programs. They are absolutely essential if young people are to be given the skills, training and experience that they need to put them in a position where they will be more employable prospects. The Budget should be supported strongly because of this additional emphasis which is placed this year on training, skills acquisition and work experience.
I said that there were two principles upon which the Budget was based. What I have said so far is directed to that first principle. The second principle is equally important. It is to provide social welfare assistance in many forms for those members of the community who are unable to care for themselves and their families fully. Let there be no mistake about it; the Labor Party has no exclusive franchise on social welfare. The present Government, since it came to office, has been generous in its social welfare assistance, and rightly so. Its generosity and understanding of the needs of less fortunate members of the community is continued in this Budget as it has been so amply demonstrated in its previous Budgets. In the first place there is a substantial increase in overall social welfare payments of 15.4 per cent: It is not widely enough understood in the community that the Government is now committed to spending, on social welfare alone, over $13 billion this year. Secondly, there are increases in family allowances. These increases, in effect, amount to 50 per cent in the case of the allowances for the first and second children.
Thirdly there is a new form of assistance to help families that are on very low incomes. A tax free family income supplement of $10 a week will be paid for each dependent child of a low income family not in receipt of social security pensions.

Fourthly, there is a very large increase of 28 per cent in all forms of assistance under the Children's Services Program, including increased grants to family day care schemes and a fee rebate for preschool day care for families in need. Furthermore, pensions and other benefits will continue to be indexed so that those in receipt of them will continue to receive protection against increased costs. There is a further increase in assistance for pensioners who live in rented accommodation. There is a whole range of further and additional forms of assistance for those on unemployment and sickness benefits, for those who are disabled and who need particular help, and for those who are aged or disabled and who need special assistance for accommodation. The details are there for all to see. The Australian community need be in no doubt about one very basic thing, that is, that this Government is a government of compassion, a government that recognises that there are people in ~he community who need help and assistance, and a government that is prepared to provide that assistance and help and to do so in very large and generous measure.
This Budget, therefore, stands on its own merits on those two principles-economic progress and social concern. What is the alternative, such as it is? There is nothing, not a syllable, in the Australian Labor Party's alternative proposals we have heard tonight or read anywhere else that would contribute to solving Australia's economic problems. Those problems would be exacerbated by the Labor Party's alternative, which is the
same old socialist program-more government expenditure, a bigger deficit, the higher interest rates that come in its wake, higher taxes, more types of taxes, and more government control through more government bodies. At least there is one thing we can be clear about, and that is that the Labor Party is proposing an enormous deficit which would bankrupt this country.
Let us look in a little more detail at what the ALP proposes by way of a deficit. We have heard, for instance, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) advocating a deficit of 4 per cent of gross domestic product. That is about $6.5 billion.
His leader tonight was at least a bit more modest. The deficit he proposed was between $1 billion and $1.5 billion. Honourable members can take their pick. There is plenty of room to manoeuvre. The fact is, and it is a critical fact, that the consequence of that would be devastating so far as inflation is concerned. Additional pressure would be placed on the capital market with a deficit of anything like that size. Inflation would be fuelled and interest rates would undoubtedly increase. The Labor Party has no policy on interest rates, it

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 859

seems, other than a policy that would inevitably increase them. Not only does the Opposition not know where it stands on the deficit but it does not seem to understand the inflationary impact that a larger domestic deficit would have on the economy as a whole. On the other hand, the Government has decided that a modest domestic Budget surplus of $230m would strike the right balance between a positive response to the economic diffi-
culties facing Australia and a responsible approach to economic management.
The Government has also proposed substantial and responsible reductions in personal tax. Let there be no mistake about it, Labor could not possibly finance the expansion of government that inevitably comes in the wake of a socialist government and at the same time reduce taxes. No socialist government has ever been able to do that and none will. A socialist government taxes by stealth, it taxes by inflation, and that is what a Labor Government would do in this country. The runs are on the board for the present Govern-
ment. The cuts in the present Budget are substantial and they are of major significance. They include new tax rebates for home mortgage interest rates over 10 per cent, the large increase in family allowances, and the $200 per annum increase in the spouse rebate where there is a dependent child. All of these will work in combination to make the tax burden on the vast majority of Australian families a much lighter one.
In addition, this Budget contains specific and substantial improvements to the taxation situ-
ation. These taxation and related reforms come on top of the other taxation reforms that have been implemented during the life of this Government, especially the three-step taxation scale. All of those tax reforms would be at risk under a Labor Government.
There can be no tax relief under a Labor
government; it is a contradiction in terms. A Labor government would expand government because it believes that a government can do things better than free individuals can do them. The people will pay for it through higher taxes. Is there any doubt at all that the Labor Party would expand the role of government? There should be no doubt about it. It did exactly that when it was in office and it would do it again if it had half a chance. If honourable members look at what happened at the Labor Party's Federal Conference which has just concluded they will see that the party proposes to create or expand at least 72 new government or semi-government bodies. Among those proposals are the National Energy Commission, the Hydrocarbon Exploration Government Program and the Australian Hydrocarbon

Corporation. We will even be taxed to pay for the national kangaroo monitoring study group. All of that will come on top of the inevitable expansion of government under any socialist government.
There are many proposals approved in the Budget context which are important to Australians and which are often taken for granted. Many of them are in my portfolio. I mention the Remote Area Television Scheme and the extension of the inland radio services to improve communications over very large distances in the open spaces of this country. I mention the expansion of the Australian Broadcasting Commission frequency modulation network and the establishment of a new spirit in the ABC itself. I mention very briefly the expansion of the Special Broadcasting Service and the multicultural television service that is provided by the SBS. I remind Australian people, especially those in ethnic communities, that at the recent Labor Party conference a proposal to abolish multicultural television was very narrowly defeated. These are just examples from my portfolio which show that, in the field of communications, this Government is committed to improving and expanding communications in this country. But far more important than the matters in my portfolio are those matters in the economy as a whole.
The people of this country can be confident that under the present Government our economic problems will be tackled and will be solved. The alternative is disastrous. The alternative of a socialist government in this country would simply spell ruin for the country.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.7)-Mr Deputy Speaker-
Mr Donald Cameron-Heavens. This is a drop.
Dr KLUGMAN-I thank the honourable member for Fadden. Since I have been a member of this Parliament I have had two pet hates. The first concerns the type of politician who has just spoken-the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown)-who I think is basically more intelligent than he appeared to be tonight but who just acts like a fool and an idiot. That is a part of the reason why not only this country but also democracies in general are in significant trouble. My second pet hate concerns some sections of the media. I will mention that matter in a few minutes.
I wish to make my point very clear. The general proposition that has been put by the media and by a significant number of other people is that this Budget is an election Budget and that the Government is keen on holding an election and has an excellent chance of winning an election during the

860 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

next four months or whatever period is being picked out this year. I think it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, for any democractic government to win anywhere at the present time. I do not care what honourable members opposite say about that. At this point I am not being particularly political. I think it is extremely difficult for a democratic government-it does not matter whether it is the West German Government or a conservative government, such as the Fraser Government or for that matter the Reagan Administration-to win at the present time. I hope that some honourable members opposite who occasionally think about these things are aware of that.
Recently the Australian Financial Review published two or three articles by Professor Groenewegen of Sydney University which dealt with two aspects of taxation reform and the pros and cons of indirect taxation versus direct taxation. I would like to quote somebody who is usually right-me. In a letter I wrote to the Australian Financial Review which was published on 24 June 1982-1 do not think it is a particularly political letter; it is a letter that politicians ought to think about-I said:
Professor Groenewegen's two articles on taxation reform . . . were depressing in their fair summary of the lack of intelligent discussion among politicians on this subject.
I give one partial defence only on behalf of the politicians. Groenewegen himself discussed the pros and cons of different types of taxation without coming to any conclusions.
I applaud this demonstration that very few issues are black and white, but the media do not allow politicians to adopt this rational attitude. Anybody who has doubts or can see two sides of an argument is attacked as vacillating, lacking leadership et cetera.
Even intelligent politicians, e.g. Bill Hayden, who can see both sides of most arguments are forced to behave like shrewd lawyers with a brief.
We had a perfect example of this a few minutes ago, not by the Leader of the Opposition but by the Minister for Communications who followed him in the debate. I continued:
No wonder the (at least temporarily) successful politicians are of the Menzies, Whit lam, Fraser variety, completely convinced that their line at any particular time is the only correct one.
Surely, 'leadership' in an educated democratic society should not exclude rational discussion and the realisation that not all problems are 'soluble'.
Soluble problems occur on the puzzle pages of newspapers. Problems with which we deal, problems in society, are not necessarily easily soluble or soluble at all. My letter continued:
The onus is on the media to give more publicity to discussion and less to confrontation.

Favourable publicity for demonstrations promoting slogans e.g. 'Peace', 'Right to Life', 'No Dams' is in a sense antidemocratic as it encourages those who treat the public as being most simplistic.
I hope that deep down many of the people even on the opposite side of the political fence will agree with me that we are not giving good service to the Australian people and we are not giving good service to democratic societies by behaving in this ridiculous fashion. A few minutes ago the Minister for Communications was behaving quite typically of the worst of these politicians. For example, he absolutely condemned a high deficit. Quite apart from the fact that he finished up by making all kinds of statements which were obviously going to cost lots of money in his own portfolio, he went on to condemn high deficits out of hand. Those honourable members who have been to Japan will know that that country's deficit is approximately 6 per cent of gross domestic product. It is a huge deficit. It is approximately 40 per cent of Japan's Budget. Yet, the inflation rate in Japan is running at 3 per cent compared with about II per cent here. So let us be quite clear: There is no clear cut relationship between the extent of the deficit and inflation. It is quite silly for some people to make absolute statements along those lines.
My own view is that the Government has probably tried to bring in a Budget which it considered at the time it was introduced into this House to be a possible election winner. I do not think it is; I hope it is not. As I said earlier, I do not think the contents of the Budget are particularly relevant or are likely to be relevant during an election campaign; it is the perception that the people out there have of what is happening to their country and that is partly conditioned by the promises of people when in Opposition. All I can say is as far as this Government is concerned is that when it goes down in defeat, no matter when the next election is held, it will deserve to be in that position because when in Opposition it made all kinds of promises. When in Government the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) spoke about life not being meant to be easy. When he was in Opposition he, of course, promised that life could be easy, that it was easy to give all kinds of benefits and do all kinds of things without increasing taxation. We know that is not possible. There is a trade-off in every case when we do things for the population at large.
I think it is important that we, as responsible parliamentarians, continuously point out that there are significant basic differences between the political parties because of the people who are our supporters. The people who support us on our

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 861

side are the battlers~the people who are not terribly well off in society. Therefore, we stand for a more equitable distribution of income, for a fairer type of society, for better opportunities and for equal opportunities for everybody in society. I suppose that is the basic difference between us and the people opposite. Honourable members opposite believe that the more worthwhile persons in society are the people who have made it and who have somehow reached the position in which they have a relatively high income, have maybe shown more enterprise~certainly they have more money at their disposal~and are keener to protect their assets, and they will continue to try to appeal to those people. I think the Government is unsuccessful at present mainly because of the level of interest rates. Before I refer to the details in the Budget, a former member of this House, Dr Richie Gun, who some honourable members might remember was the honourable member for Kingston and who was unfortunately defeated at the 1975 elections, sent me a cutting from an editorial in the New York Times of 6 August 1982. I think this editorial, which I received today, is relevant to this issue. President Reagan, no matter what one's views about him may be, has a real hide. He introduced and supported a Budget in the United States which will involve a deficit of between $110 billion and $140 billion in the next United States financial year. I do not criticise him for that I do not know what the best answer is to the United States problems~ but this Budget has a much higher deficit than any other Budget ever introduced in the United States. He followed the introduction of that Budget by proposing a constitutional amendment saying that the Government must balance its Budget. What a hide. The New York Times editorial~I will not read the whole article, but I think some is relevant~states:
What a relief! It took Congress most of 200 years to get over the old-fashioned idea that the Constitution should be kept lean and Hexible. Over the years, 9,400 constitutional amendments have been proposed but only 26 succeeded, and one of those repealed another. Now the Senate, at least, has passed the amendment requiring a balanced budget. With timidity conquered, it's high time to harness the Constitution in other ways as well. .
The editorial points out that there ought to be other amendments to the Constitution. It continues:
For instance, all Americans probably agree that every able bodied person deserves a job. The way to achieve that goal is now obvious.
All we have to do is pass a constitutional amendment that everybody gets a job! The editorial further states:

So far, Congress has meekly limited itself to considering legislation. . . How much mightier to add a Full Employment Amendment to the Constitution.
Then there's the problem of the Post Office. There is no governmental responsibility more clearly Federal, and there's not a voter alive who hasn't cursed the slowness of the mails. With constitutional inhibitions swept away, let Congress adopt another amendment. Section 1 would be framed with classic simplicity: The mails shall be delivered on time. .
Congress could prove its concern about high interest rates by adopting an amendment that ordains low interest rates. Exactly how low could be left to the same unspecified authorities who would define which economic forecasts are to be used in calculating the constitutional budget balance.
These paltry suggestions do not exhaust the possibilities, not if Congress now has the courage to make the Constitution truly weighty. There is rich grist for other amendments on national defence, safe streets and the nuclear family, not to mention piety in public places.
I think that is ridiculous behaviour on the part of the United States Government. But that is exactly the way this Government is behaving. Before I look at the Budget in more detail I shall make a general point. We have been told that the average single income family~there is some dispute about the amount involved~will benefit in that next financial year it will pay about $4 a week less in taxation. Of that amount $2.50 will be wiped out two months before the benefit comes in. From the beginning of next month $2.50 will be added to the cost of basic health insurance. That will not leave very much out of that $4 Budget benefit.
I suggest to the House that certain propositions which have been put are untrue. One o(the propositions is that this Budget will help the battlers. It will not help the battlers. A certain amount of redistribution is involved in the Budget. Basically, it is a redistribution from the very high income earner to the high-middle class income earner. Let me illustrate what has been proposed in this Budget. The priority which the Government has accepted is to help those people who are at work, who pay taxes and who receive reasonable wage increases. The Government has decided that it cannot afford to help the jobless or the soon-to-be jobless. I think that is one of the most important points which will help the Opposition win the next election. We will not win just because 8 per cent or 9 per cent of the people are out of work but because a large proportion of the 90 per cent or more who are at work are scared~they are justifiably scared~that they may lose their jobs.
I think basically the Budget is aimed heavily at benefiting the upper-middle class earners and the better off elderly. I am not saying that those benefits should not have been introduced. But there are certain measures in the Budget which assist the poor, the unemployed, the low income family and the hard pressed elderly but they are relatively token measures compared with the

862 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

generosity of the measures which are intended for the upper-middle class swinging voter. The total cost, for example, of the new family income supplement which will pay $10 a week for each child to low income employed families will be $3.Sm this financial year and only $30m in a full financial year. Obviously, this is an excellent proposal. It will apply only to very few people; otherwise it would cost much more than that.
I ask honourable members to compare this $3.5m to be spent this financial year on benefits for people who really need it with the SO per cent increase in family allowances for first and second children which takes effect in November. Family allowances are neither taxed nor means tested so they go to the wealthy as well as to the poor. That increase will cost $2S0m this financial year and $37Sm in a full year. We are paying $3.Sm this year to the people who are really poor~that is where the money is really required for the kids~ yet we are paying $2S0m, about 70 times as much, to people who, in many instances, do not need an extra $I.SO a week in their non-means-tested familyallowances.
Similarly there is no housing benefit at all, for those people in the community who rent accommodation apart from the odd pensioner whose benefit has been increased from $8 to $10 a week. This is a minor benefit compared with the benefits for people who have a $60,000 mortgage on a house. As we all know, it has been declared by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that people will be entitled to switch their mortgages around and, therefore, have subsidies for things apart from housing.
Indirect taxation has already increased. It increased on the day the Budget was brought down, 17 August, whilst the other benefits will not take effect for some considerable time. The benefit paid to unemployed people under the age of 18 will go up by $4 from $36 to $40 a week. This is an II per cent increase after seven years of no increase at all. Similarly, the increase for the single unemployed does not get them up to the sort of benefit that they ought to be getting or need. The people who are getting the biggest proportional tax savings are those earning between $340 and $460 a week. When one considers that average weekly earnings are now just under $330 a week and that roughly 60 per cent of people earn less than the average it is clear that the tax cut was hardly aimed at providing the greatest benefit for the battler. As I said earlier, in fact the Budget redistributes income from high income earners to upper middle income earners.
In addition to the matter I have just dealt with I would like to refer to two other aspects of the

Budget, one of which is the question of the economy not being properly controlled. We do not have accurate statistics. It is very difficult to say exactly what is happening. To some extent the Treasury is failing. One day last week the overnight interest rate for money was at the rate of 100 per cent per annum. Admittedly this was for only one night but people who invested money for that night~from three o'clock one afternoon to lunch time the next day~were paid at a rate equal to 100 per cent per annum because there was such a shortage of money. There has been very little discussion on this topic. My interpretation about why there was such a shortage of money~whilst a number of factors may have been involved~is that people are withdrawing
money from Australia at present because of a continuing devaluation of our currency.
In the Government's control of the economy it has to try to establish more facts. It has failed to establish many facts. Dr McCawley, from the Research School of Pacific Studies at the Australian
National University, has suggested in a note to me that the facts are very vague. If honourable members look at the last issue of the quarterly estimates of national income and expenditure published on 17 August~last week~they will see that the measured growth rates of GDP varied
dramatically depending on where one places the statistical discrepancy. That is clearly stated at the beginning of that monograph. A completely different estimate is given depending on whether one calculates the statistical discrepancy on the expenditure side or on the income side of the account. If one looks at it from the expenditure based proposition it is quite clear that GDP changes are terrible at present whilst if one looks at it from the income based proposition then things may be improving.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (9.27)~The reply of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to the Budget tonight offered Australia no specific alternative Budget. It was a bits and pieces reply; it was an exaggeration and an overstatement. The leader was a prophet of doom and disaster. He talked of panic, shakiness and shonkiness. It was a negative reply and it offered no solutions for Australia's economic difficulties. The Leader of the Opposition continually talked the economy down. His speech lacked professionalism. Honourable members opposite know I am telling the truth. It was a very disappointing effort from a former Treasurer and a man who aspires to be Prime Minister of Australia.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 863

Let us look at the statement of the Leader of the Opposition. His Budget strategy boils down to doubling the Government's deficit, the increase to be fully financed by printing money. He talks of using the Treasury Bills and the money supply combination to do this. That is in his speech. He talks of a net addition to the money supply. We will be back to the Whitlam years. The economic package of the Leader of the Opposition is a prescription for more, not less, inflation; for less, not more, growth; for more, not less, unemployment; and for higher, rather than lower, interest rates. The limited budget figuring in the Leader of the Opposition's speech suggests an additional $3 billion in expenditure, half of which would have to be financed by an increase in personal taxes which, combined with the Australian Labor Party's desire to shift from direct to indirect taxation, implies a significant increase in the income tax take. Under the Hayden proposals income tax would need to go up substantially. Personal taxes would rise. The criticisms by the Leader of the Opposition of the Budget figuring of the Government are unsubstantiated and without foundation. The attack he made on the Government's record on tax avoidance is unfair. No government has done more than the present Government to stamp out tax avoidance. The Labor Party, when it had its opportunity in government, did nothing.
Let us look at some of the Leader of the Opposition's statements. He said that unemployment benefits were understated in the Budget by $300m. That assumes something like an additional 130,000 recipients of unemployment benefit but no evidence was presented by the Leader of the Opposition for this estimate. The Government's estimate of 395,000 unemployed has stood the test of public debate. The Leader of the Opposition said that the home interest rebate would cost an additional $70m. He provided no evidence for this estimate and his assumption implies close to a 50 per cent understatement on our estimate. The Leader of the Opposition said that $615m through penalties on late payment was underestimated by $400m. But the Budget estimate is based on over $2.1 billion income tax overdue as at 30 June 1982.
Mr Young-Come on, Roger, shake it up.
Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for Port Adelaide should listen; he might learn something if he listens. His leaderI think he thinks he is his leader-said that the health rebate was underestimated by $150m. There is no basis in the Leader of the opposition's speech for that estimate. I think that one of the most interesting things to come out of the Leader of the Opposition's speech is a comparison of labour costs and

productivity. The Leader of the Opposition attempted in his speech to make much of the point that since 1975-76 real labour costs grew by II per cent and productivity grew by 12 per cent. He tried to argue that real labour costs are not really a problem. However, if you include the Labor years in government and take 1972-73 as a base-that is what the Leader of the Opposition failed to do-real labour costs grew by 26 per cent and productivity grew by 19 per cent. Clearly, the labor cost increases were concentrated in the Labor Government years and the productivity increases were concentrated in the Liberal-National Country Party coalition years.
The Budget presented by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) a week ago is a realistic Budget for the times. The Treasurer points out that the international recession is now hitting us hard, our overseas markets have shrunk, economic growth has faltered, unemployment is rising and inflation remains far too high. Interest rates are hurting many of us. The Government is to be congratulated for features of the Budget such as financial relief for families in the form of increased family allowance, personal tax reductions, interest relief for people paying off their homes and the introduction of a new family income supplement to help certain low income families. Others who benefit from the Budget are pensioners and unemployed people.
I particularly welcome what the Government has done to provide personal taxation relief and I support the increases in indirect taxation and the slight broadening of the indirect tax base. These tax measures will provide assistance in the short term in the financial year of the Budget. But in the long run, for the years ahead, changing tax scales in one Budget is only tinkering with the controls of an existing tax system. We still need complete reform of the tax system. This is a matter of urgency. The burden of direct tax through income tax at the end of the Budget year will still be too great. This Budget makes a start in this direction but we must relieve the long term tax burden of the pay-as-you-earn wage and salary earner. A new, more equitable tax system which removes the incentive to avoid tax and which encourages people to work hard is the only long term answer for personal taxation in this country. The more we put off this reform the greater the problem becomes.
I particularly welcome the start of taxation relief, made in the Budget, with the $1,000 rebate on dividend income received by individuals. This move should encourage individual investors to invest in Australian companies listed on stock

864 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

exchanges and give individuals confidence to invest in shares in Australian companies without the discrimination they previously suffered through double taxation. This rebate is a start in the right direction of encouraging individual Australians to participate in the free enterprise system by the ownership of shares in Australian corporations. I look forward to the amount of the rebate being increased in future Budgets. Similarly, the announcement of the employee share acquisition schemes in the Budget which will give employees an incentive to invest in companies which employ them is welcome.
I turn now to indirect taxes. The Government's widening and deepening of the indirect tax base through sales tax is welcome and sensible. However, I think we lost an opportunity in the Budget to impose a retail sales tax to shift the burden of collection to the final point of sale. It is unfair and inequitable that it is the responsibility of the wholesaler and the manufacturer to act as a tax collector for the Government. The point at which the sales tax should be paid, I believe, is the retail level. Wholesalers and manufacturers have to pay the existing sales tax within 21 days but they themselves do not get paid for 60, 90 or 120 days and have to finance these payments of tax to the Commissioner of Taxation. This adds to their costs and is in itself inflationary. It produces also a distorted effect on the manufacturing sector where manufacturers are now producing and dealing in goods that attract the lower rates of sales tax because the burden of financing those
payments in payment of the sales tax is less. I believe that in return for the tax relief in this Budget retailers would have accepted the equity of a retail point of sale tax. I hope that in the future that may come about.
From a strict monetarist point of view the Budget could be criticised for being too expansionary and not having a smaller deficit. Strict monetarists would say that is too generous in terms of welfare payments and tax concessions. However, it does hit the right note of expansion needed at this time in the economy. The Government-as evidenced by the size of the deficit-is helping to alleviate areas of hardship by making money available in the economy through increased unemployment benefit payments and welfare spending. The Australian economy is, and has been, out of kilter with the other major Western economies. Unemployment and interest rates in Australia have lagged behind those in overseas countries. In the past unemployment in Australia and certainly deficits have been lower than in other major Western economies. There is now a potential for our unemployment

rate and level of inflation to increase and current interest rate levels to remain where they are while our trading partners' levels go in the other direction. Many economists and political commentators hold this view. However, time alone will tell. I consider that this Budget could turn out to be one of the most innovative of any in the Western world today.
Monetarist theory is to control the economy by contracting the money supply to defeat inflation and then to emerge with a healthy economy. The United Kingdom with monetarist budget policies has got the inflation rate down and is starting to get modest growth but at the price of very high unemployment. In the United States of America President Reagan has now increased taxes and reversed his previous economic strategies because the United States' deficit was so high. This Australian Budget sets out to alleviate problems in the short term. This is no doubt predicated on the hope of an upturn in the United States' economy. Whilst this has not yet occurred there is a definite trend in the United States to lower interest rates caused by a fall-off in consumer demand. We have seen in the last few days Wall Street stock exchange rallies. I believe that if this stock market trend continues it could, in fact, create the right psychological climate of confidence needed in the United States to create a consumer-led demand investment recovery. Let us all hope that this
occurs. If it does-there is hope that it will-this Budget in Australia is just right for the times. The only real risk is that it could be said to be too inflationary. However, if wage demands reach reasonable proportions-I believe that potential exists-I do not consider that the increases in indirect tax in this Budget will add substantially to inflation. It needs to be said that Australia's deficit is not high by world standards. It is a quarter to
one-third of that of the United States, on a comparable basis, and less than that of Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany and Japan. The Australian Government, which has generally been applying monetarist economic policies, has not abandoned them in this mildly expansionary Budget, whose effect is to increase transfer payments and the potential amount of disposable income available to consumers in difficult economic times.
Welfare recipients and taxpayers alike benefit by increased disposable income. There is a risk that such increases to individuals will flow into savings rather than into the economy through purchases. However, the Budget does create its own climate of confidence, which should give those with additional disposable income confidence to invest in Australia. I believe that we will

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 865

see these transfer payments and this increased disposable income spent in the economy.
Let us look now at the subject of wage restraint. Unreasonable wage demands and demands for shorter working hours are totally irresponsible in the current economic climate. Union demands are eroding the standard of living of all Australians. In a recent report to my electorate, I said: 'Tax cuts are a vital element of wages policy and must be accepted by the Australian Council of Trade Unions as a trade-off for wage restraint'. Wage restraint is a key to the success of the Budget. The current economic climate and state of the economy is starting to inhibit some union claims. The regrettable lay-offs and retrenchments are having an effect on some claims. However, it is now, as never before, time for the ACTU to be responsible to all Australians. The Budget's generous tax reductions and concessions, increased family allowances, spouse rebates and home loan interest rebate must be accepted by the union movement in lieu of wage increases, and wage demands must be reduced accordingly. The Budget forms, and is the basis of, a claim for wage restraint by the Government. The union movement must take this into account and moderate its demands.
The Labor Party's response to the Budget has really been a non-event. I have the feeling that it caught the Opposition completely by surprise. The Australian Labor Party really believes that it is a good Budget, but for it to say so would incur the wrath of the unions. The Labor Party cannot upset the unions because the union movement and the Labor Party are intertwined. The Labor Party in this House is the parliamentary wing of the union movement. Because the Budget is contrary to trade union policy and the ALP is controlled by the unions, the Labor Party must disagree totally with the Budget. It is a sad day that, because of this, the ALP is locked into the adversary system and locked into a knee jerk automatic rejection of the Budget.
The ALP's proposed pact with the ACTU is a sham. Under it a Labor government would support full wage indexation, tax relief and higher welfare spending in return for wage moderation for the unions. This pact would be suicide for Australia. It would create enormous inflation but, above all, it would put up labour costs to such an extent that today's unemployment figures would seem minuscule.
Let us look to the future. In supporting the Budget, I must say that I consider that all governments must look to the longer term future of Australia. At a time when the Western economies are contracting, we need to think harder than ever

of the future of our way of life. The prediction that unemployment will rise, with the high levels of unemployment already existing in Western economies, is a very serious problem facing all Western societies generally. Quite rightly society today has given individuals high expectations but regrettably it can no longer fulfill many of them.
Unemployment is a major sociological and political problem and something that governments, employers and unions alike must tackle. Unions are primarily concerned with those who have jobs and seem to care very little about those who have not. For unions to pursue shorter hours and wage claims at this time is the height of selfishness. The current shorter working hours claims by blue collar workers in Queensland can only result in more people being thrown out of work in that State. I know of no other Western economy in which shorter working hours are being pursued. What is it about Australians that causes them to do this to themselves? It is time that the unions put Australia first and put a shoulder behind the wheel to get this country on its feet. Unions, like the rest of us, should look at the strength of our economy and build on those strengths. They should look at new options for job creation and investment rather than destroying what we have.
In Australia today we need a new and innovative major research program to be taken into the problems facing society-to examine particularly the job creation potential of new technology and of changing lifestyles. Such a research program would be best carried out by a new independent think-tank or institute using the best brains available from government, universities and the private sector. It should be in part government funded and its program should study technological, sociological and economic trends. The special Bicentenary Road Development Program in the Budget establishes goals to be achieved by our bicentennial year 1988. We all need to be thinking of the positive things we can do to improve our society for a better Australia in 1988. The 1988 bicentennial year provides us with a bench-mark to consider the nature of Australian society for the rest of this century.
We need to examine what is happening to our social and economic system. So few of us seem to be looking to the future. It was refreshing to see Mr B. A. Santamaria's thoughtful forward looking views in today's Australian. He refers to the contemporary historian Fernand Braudel's analysis of society. Braudel refers to a crisis of structures. He and Mr Santamaria believe that the size of economic units, whether companies or unions, and the size of governments and cities create insoluble problems. Braudel says that our social

866 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

and economic system will have to be reshaped. I do not know whether that is quite right, but what I do know and what is certain is that society is changing and will have to be reshaped. It is our challenge to see that it is reshaped in the right direction. Now, more than ever, is the time for us to be thinking ahead and looking where new job opportunities and industries are. When we identify them, they may need particular government support, based on their employment possibilities,
to get them off the ground. I support the Government's Budget.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (9.47)-Tonight we heard the Leader of the Opposition (Mr
Hayden) make what was probably his finest speech. It was a speech which outlined an alternative policy, a policy to bring Australia back to economic health and back from the precipice it now stands on as a result of seven years of this Government's economic policies. Is it any wonder
that in the latest opinion polls the Leader of the Opposition has an approval rating of 59 per cent compared with the rating for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of 41 per cent? Honourable members opposite must realise that we sincerely hope there will be an early election. On the basis of these opinion polls, we would absolutely eat it. The Leader of the Opposition called the Budget a give and take Budget. If one looks closely into it, there is no doubt that that is what it is. It gives with one hand and it takes with the other. It gives income tax cuts on the one hand and increases sales tax and other indirect taxes on the other. It is a dishonest Budget brought in by a dishonest Government.
I want to touch on one or two of the issues which are very important and which affect this Budget. Today we have very high interest rates which are being falsely held up owing to the dependence by the Government on overseas capital to meet the balance of payments deficit. The generallevel of interest rates in Australia today is the highest in the world. Interest rates in Australia are 2t per cent to 3 per cent higher than they are in any other country. The facts are that this country is living beyond its means. It is exporting less than it is importing with the result that last financial year we had this massive balance of payments deficit of over $9 billion. It was $9 billion, not $9m. I submit, as I have been submitting for some considerable time, that there should be an appreciable devaluation of our currency to make our exports more competitive on world markets and to reduce imports. That is the only answer unless we are going to continue in this vicious circle of having to attract overseas capital to this country and having to hold up interest rates at massive

levels in order to meet a balance of payments deficit.
Unfortunately, the Government is a disciple of a discredited economist, Milton Friedman. It has pursued Friedman's monetarist policies over the last seven years with the result that our economy is now on its knees. I would like to quote to the House parts of an article in the Weekend Australian of 15 and 16 August which contains an interview with John Kenneth Galbraith, who would be the most respected economist still alive. I make the point that this was before the agreement between the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Council of Trade Unions on a new prices and incomes policy. That is very important when reading this article. The headline states: 'Monetarism is not the answer to economic woes, says Galbraith', and the article begins:
With the US economy nearing crisis, economist John Kenneth Galbraith argues that only income policies based on price and wage controls can now ensure the survival of Western economies.
Galbraith said that in an interview with the West German weekly news magazine Der Spiegel. The Australian article goes on:
President Reagan's economic policy-
I mention President Reagan because his Administration, this Government and the Thatcher Government in the United Kingdom are all following the same monetarist policies as laid down by Milton Friedman-
is pushing the United States into a crisis with high deficits, rocketing interest rates and unemployment because it is based on the false premise of stimulating growth by aiding the wealthy at the expense of low-income Americans . . .
He warns that only adoption of a comprehensive incomes policy with wage and price guidelines can cure the West's deep-rooted economic ills.
That is precisely the policy which was outlined here tonight by the Leader of the Opposition. The article continues:
The . . . former Harvard University Professor says monetarist Nobel prize-winning economist, Milton Friedman, who inspired the Reagan administration's economic policy, was an 18th century economist, though in several Western countries governments have espoused his call for a reduction of the monetary mass, less welfare spending and his supplyside theories.
I interpose to say that the policies of Milton Friedman were the policies followed during the latter part of the 19th century, right through the 20th century to the mid-l 930s, and took the world into two depressions. It was not until Lord Keynes's policies were followed that the world was able to come out of the Great Depression of the 1930s. The article continues:
A firm believer in the need for State intervention in economic life, Mr Galbraith says: 'I believe 1 am in a luckier situation than my colleague Friedman. My name is mentioned in

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 867

relation with the past, but with a past that was successful. He stands, on the contrary, for an unsuccessful present.
Milton Friedman's theory, monetarism, bases the management of our complex modern economy on a single tool: monetary policy.
He says it is wrong to throw on the scrap heap the theory of demand management based on principles enunciated by the late British economist (Lord) John Maynard Keynes, during the pre-war depression.
') consider my economic ideas as fully timely. It would be wrong to throwaway the principle of State-controlled demand management. But the Keynes version, tailored for the Great Depression of the 1930s, is no longer adapted to our times. Keynes himself would be the last man to claim so. His main achievement was that he came out for a policy that suited his time'.
I have quoted a few of the paragraphs from this article deliberately. I believe every member of the Government should read it. I repeat that the article is contained in the Weekend Australian of 15-16 August this year. Government members should read it, ponder it and then consider whether their headlong thrust into acceptance of the theories of Milton Freidman, the man who is responsible for the economic morass we are in today because he has convinced so many countries in the Western world, should be continued. We heard those policies being enunciated tonight by the previous speaker, the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton).
As I said, these statements by Mr Galbraith confirm Labor's prices and incomes policy, recently agreed to between the Labor Party and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. It should always be remembered that Labor can negotiate far better with the trade union movement than can a Tory conservative government. We are in a far better position to get common sense policies adopted by government and the trade union movement and to get that very necessary wage restraint that is talked about so much by the Government. The future of this country lies in getting that co-operation between Government and the trade union movement.
Let us look at the Government's record. Inflation in Australia is by far higher than it is amongst our major trading partners, and it is rising. Honourable members should keep in mind that it is rising. Yet this Government promised in successive election campaigns in 1975, 1977 and 1980 to 'bring inflation down'. Instead of that inflation in Australia, as I said, is actually higher than it is amongst our major trading partners, and it is rising. Let us look at the unemployment rate. It stands at 7 per cent.
Mr Humphreys-Disgraceful!
Mr ARMITAGE-As the honourable member says, it is disgraceful. It stands at 7 per cent and is

rising. The Government itself admits that by the end of this year it will be 8 per cent. We all know how rubbery its figures are. We all know how, time and again, it has made predictions and the actual figures have been much higher than those predictions. Some sources say that the unemployment rate will rise by the end of this financial year to 10 per cent. We are getting towards the unemployment rate that the Thatcher Government has achieved in the United Kingdom; that is, 13.4 per cent.
Mr Humphreys-They are on the same track.
Mr ARMITAGE-I agree with the honourable member. This Government is on the same track. Let us once again remember one of the many promises of the Prime Minister. One after the other has been broken. Do honourable members remember his promise in 1975? He said: 'There will be a job for everyone who wants to work'. Yet today the unemployment rate is at its highest since the Great Depression of the 1930s. It is rising steadily. This Government has admitted that its own policies will in no way arrest it. In other words, it has abdicated all responsibility.
Mr Kerin-What did he say about wage indexation?
Mr ARMITAGE-The Prime Minister also said he would not interfere with Medibank or wage indexation. I could mention 20 promises that the Prime Minister has made in the past. Everyone of them has been broken. What else would we expect from such a dishonest politician.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Chifley will withdraw the reflection on another member of this House.
Mr ARMITAGE-I withdraw. I think we also have to look at the cause of inflation. I shall do that when I resume my speech, which will be resumed when the Budget debate next comes on.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Housing-1982-83 Budget-Mobility Allowance to the Handicapped-Interest RatesFertiliser Subsidy Legislation-Service Pensions-Nuclear Industry
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (lO.Q)-In a statement made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on a review of housing policy some months ago, he had this to say:

868 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Adjournment

Private home ownership is an important element in the cohesiveness of Australian families, which is fundamental to the strength of our society.
His paper then went on to outline what initiatives the Government would take to assist home buyers. He gave very little time in his statement to the home renter, except for what he said on page 5. There he identified one of the problems with housing as being the increased rental payments for some persons in rental accommodation. It is mainly about those in rental accommodation that I wish to speak, because this matter has been totally neglected in the Budget-except for some provision for some pensioners.
Because of this concentration on the needs of home buyers, the difficulties of both private and public tenants have been largely ignored. The trends within the housing sector should be seen in a broader context-a massive shortage of public housing and a dramatically shrinking private rental sector, together with a serious decline in the housing industry. It is essential in any discussion on housing that it is recognised that the housing sector has been permitted to operate on the basis of a fundamental inequity-a substantial proportion of the population has been denied any access to home ownership and has been forced to live in an unregulated private rental sector or grossly inadequate public rental sector.
Social workers, industry groups and other concerned parties have estimated that over 100,000 families are homeless in Australia. Another quarter of a million are making do in makeshift or mobile homes, and more than 80,000 are waiting for public housing. None of these things is happening by chance, nor are they beyond control. They are inevitable outcomes of basic changes to the nation's economy which this Government's policies are designed to achieve. A fundamental right of all Australians should be that they are adequately fed, clothed and housed-and yet in Australia poverty is rampant, and worsening. As Professor Henderson said in the Age on 20 April:
There is no doubt that the Australian Government does not have an effective system of income security. It leaks like a sieve and people who fall through it depend on voluntary agencies having enough money to assist them.
People on low incomes, on pensions and on unemployment benefit are increasingly disadvantaged by the increasing high rents they are forced to pay. The Government's housing policy is an example of the neglect of the poor and needy by the Government's economic policies. It has been produced as a major contribution towards enhancing high private ownership. Not only will it not achieve this objective, but also its effect will

be to exclude even more Australians from owning or renting a home.
The cost of housing finance has increased dramatically in recent years. In 1968 bank interest rates were 5 per cent. They now range from about 11.5 per cent to 13.5 per cent-probably even higher-while building society rates are around 15 per cent. Not only has finance for home purchase become more expensive, but also it has grown scarcer. Funds for housing from traditional sources are drying up, a trend reflected in the dramatic decline in new dwellings being built. August 1981 figures show a decline of 12 per cent in the rate of new dwelling commencements from August 1980 figures, and dwelling approvals again declined in the December 1981 quarter, and again this year. The building industry is on its knees.
All this is taking its toll of the low income home purchaser, and despite statements by the Treasurer, there is an increase in mortgage defaults. Figures from the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, the largest mortgage insurer, show an increase in the level of mortgage default claims, expressed as a percentage of total premiums, from 4 per cent in 1970-71 to a staggering 35 per cent in 1979-80-a savage indictment of the Government's housing policy. Of course, interest rates are not the only factor in the increasing level of mortgage default. Continually high levels of unemployment and the ever increasing cost of living also play a major role.
However, the housing crisis is not only about reduced access to home ownership. Because the housing finance sector is being squeezed by government economic policy, tenants in both public and private rental are being hit as much as, if not more than, owners or aspiring owners. If the current squeeze on housing finance is continued, two major trends in the private rental market can be expected to worsen. Interest rate increases are forcing private landlords to increase rates to maintain returns on their investment. Further, as other forms of investment become more attractive we will see a decreased investment in the housing sector and a further decline in the supply of private rental housing. The growing shortage of rental stock leaves tenants fair game for increasing rents. Those in Victoria are experiencing serious difficulties following almost three decades of Liberal government. Successive Liberal governments in Victoria have so decimated the housing industry that only 3 per cent of all-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Adjournment

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES869

Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (IO.S)-In view of
the fact that the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child), who has just resumed her seat, canvassed some matters which directly impinge upon the reputation of this Government as a government that has compassion and cares for the needs of people, I take the opportunity to highlight some of the initiatives that have recently been announced by the Government as a demonstration of its compassion-and its care for fellow human beings. I know it is always easy to talk about issues in such a way as to portray one's opponents as people without care or compassion and to argue that one is the only person who has a monopoly on conscience and concern. For that reason, I occasionally like to indicate that I do not think that anybody in this place is entitled to say that other honourable members are not aware of the needs of people. I think members are confronted with the needs of the people more frequently than most other people.
Honourable members, no matter on which side of the House they sit, develop an appreciation of those needs. The difference is very often in the way in which they believe that more meaningful results can be achieved. Useful gains in productivity can lead to a situation in which a great deal more can be done for all people. That is certainly a view held strongly on this side of the House. I am not suggesting that it is not a view held by those on the other side of the House, but I sometimes have my doubts. The assumption seems at times to be that there is, without increased productivity, a bottomless pit into which governments can delve to obtain the necessary resources to meet the needs which we appreciate. The recent Budget is a demonstration of the Government's capacity to recognise particular problems which have become more pressing. I identify one with which I have been associated and which I am very pleased has been achieved in this Budget. I refer to the grants that will be now available in the form of a mobility allowance to severely handicapped people.
Mr Milton-It is not enough.
Mr RUDDOCK-It might be argued that it is not enough. I am pleased that the principle has been recognised, and recognised by this Government. I am very proud to be associated with the initiative and I know that many organisations interested in the needs of handicapped people very much welcome the initiative although they too would argue that it might not be as generous as it would be if we were able to write a blank cheque. An organisation in New South Wales, the Association of Quadriplegics and Paraplegics, led by Dr John Grant, a very noted neurosurgeon, has

been actively campaigning for this allowance for some time. Its research worker, David Kerr, a lad who lives in my area, has spent a great deal oftime putting proposals before government and before members of parliament. Before the last Budget that organisation wrote to all members of parliament in an effort to raise the interest of members in this subject. Before the consideration of this Budget. I was pleased to arrange for members of that organisation to see the Government members back bench committee that had an interest in these questions and to meet with those members and put their views fully before them. I was also able to assist, as no doubt others who were aware of their need did, in bringing those views to the attention of the Ministry.
I want to let honourable members know something of the nature of this allowance because it is important to recognise that, whilst assistance was provided before in the form of reductions in sales tax to enable handicapped people to purchase a motor vehicle, not all handicapped people are able to purchase a motor vehicle or to avail themselves of a motor vehicle to assist them in making their way to their place of employment. This allowance will assist them directly if it is necessary for them to take a taxi, to use a bus designed especially for handicapped people or to use public transport, albeit with difficulty. I think it is a measure of this Government's compassion and concern that it has identified this group of people and that for the first time an allowance will be available to people who are severely handicapped. Of course, if others want to look at the allowance at some future time it can always be reviewed and adjusted upwards.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (10.10)-1 know that in the past week honourable members on both sides of the House have been particularly interested in gauging public reaction to the Budget. Tonight I wish to refer to two reactions which concern me and which ought to concern the House. The first concerns an invalid pensioner who came to see me yesterday. He has a dependent wife and has no income apart from the married rate of pension. They are paying off a home. Because their incomes are below the tax threshold they do not pay tax. Because they do not pay tax they will get no relief through the taxation system for interest paid on the mortgage.
I wish to set out the details of their position. I have looked at their papers. In the financial year

870 REPRESENTATIVES 24 Aug~st 1982

Adjournment

1981-82 they paid $1,501.20 to the lending authority in monthly instalments, which were $120 at the start of the year, increasing to $125.60 by the end of the year. Over that year the principal of the loan was reduced by $212.78. An amount of $1,288.42 was paid as interest at a rate of 14.5 per cent. It appears to me that the interest paid over the Government's 10 per cent limit was $345.22. If these people were better off, if they received additional income to take them over the tax threshold, they would become eligible for the tax rebate scheme and would receive a rebate of 30 per cent of that $345.22 that they paid in interest, which amounts to $103.56. That would reduce their monthly repayments by $8.63, an amount which would mean quite a deal to people in that situation. As it is, because their income is so small, they will get nothing. Surely this is an anomaly. Surely it is an anomaly that people in better circumstances than this couple can, under this new scheme, obtain relief from rising interest rates through the tax system but that these people, battling to pay off their home on the married rate of pension, get no relief. Why is it? It is because they are worse off. It is an anomaly which I hope the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), who is in the House, and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) will look at with some sympathy.
The second reaction is in the form of a letter which I think speaks for itself. The letter states:
Dear Mr Free,
Although well aware that much of Mr Howard's Budget Speech last night would meet with disapproval from you, [ feel it does no harm to draw attention to that portion which affects me among those other great numbers of pensioners who not only received no benefit but are expected to pay more sales tax, petrol tax, and any other increases that may accrue.
With no income other than pension [ could barely restrain my wife and self from hysteria when we heard that we would benefit from a rise in tax threshold and also in allowable income. Unemployment being at its present figure we fail to see how we can earn $50 a week between us, or even $5.
Please Mr Free, show us the way.
To show this pensioner couple the way, quite obviously I will later be sending them Labor how to vote cards. It is also quite obvious from the tone of the letter that they do not really need any more persuasion than that.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (IO.14)-Last week, because of a turnaround by the Australian Democrats in the Senate, the Senate passed the Government's superphosphate and nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy legislation. They had previously opposed it. As the representative of a rural electorate I had been deeply concerned at this antifarmer approach. However, as I inquired further into this matter it became obvious to me that the welfare of my farmer constituents was academic

to the position taken by the Democrats in opposing this subsidy. All previous fertiliser legislation
had provided for the payment of a bounty to the superphosphate manufacturers. This was notwithstanding the publicity that inferred that this bounty was a subsidy to farmers. That the payment was truly a bounty to the manufacturer was supported by payment being restricted to superphosphate of Australian manufacture. Further, sea transportation of rock phosphate to Australia is reserved for the Australian National Line, increasing the cost of the finished product substantially.
The legislation which has just passed the Senate made the payment truly a subsidy. The legislation said to users: 'Here is a sum of money paid to recognise your disability of large fertiliser costs. You may spend it in the most competitive market'. It was the conversion of the assistance from bounty to manufacturer to subsidy to consumer that enraged the Australian Democrats. Why was that so? I choose to believe that they were led to this position by their spokesman on such maters, Senator John R. Siddons. Senator Siddons has a spare time job as Chairman of Directors of Siddons Industries Ltd, which manufactures the Sidchrome spanner. This 'non-adjustable wrench' is in receipt of substantial bounty protection. In 1980-81 the Australian Government paid bounties totalling $367,224 in this area. Siddons
Industries received all but $378.84 of that money. The shock that went through the board room of Siddons Industries at the thought of a government saying to our farmers: 'Here is, say, $5 each; go buy your spanners in the best market', is easy to consider. This unreasonable reaction by Siddons and its top executive was a clear message to my constituents to buy someone else's spanners in future. I hope that they do so. The significant message to me in this exercise of personal survival is to question the integrity of a party that can support such parochial actions after campaigning under the slogan 'We'll keep the bastards honest'.
Mr Deputy Speaker, should you believe that I have quoted an isolated case, I ask you to consider the same senator's private member's Bill for 'industrial democracy' which passed the Senate with Australian Labor Party support on 26 November 1981. The Industrial Democracy Bill 1981 has the admirable purpose of encouraging business enterprise to involve its workforce in ownership and management of such business enterprises. So far so good. However, this Bill also provides a substantial incentive to such companies by way of tax reductions. In brief, proposed section 20 (I) of the Bill allows for a company to be registered by a statutory board if it has sold at least 8 per cent of

Adjournment

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 871

its share capital to its general work force. Proposed section 28 (2) (a) states:
Where an enterprise is a registered enterprise during the whole of a year ending on 30 June, the rate at which tax is payable by that enterprise in respect of that year shall be reduced by 8 per cent.
Without considering the opportunity to build tax avoidance schemes around this provision, I was interested to know why such a substantial incentive from the tax system was needed to encourage companies to enter an arrangement which had so many natural attractions as listed in the senator's speech on the subject. The senator was at pains to state in his second reading speech that in the first year of operation it was likely that only a small number of enterprises would be able to satisify the criteria. I wonder who would meet the criteria today and thus be one of the first to share in the estimated $20m per annum impost to taxpayers that Senator Siddons mentioned in his speech. The report of the directors of Siddons Industries for 1981 states:
During the year the company issued 669,000 fully paid ordinary shares of 50 cents each at a premium of 50 cents per share to the trustees of the Siddons Industries Limited Employees' Share Trust.
I have calculated further by looking at the balance sheet. I found that the company made provision to pay $2,637,273 in income tax. An 8 per cent reduction represents a saving of $211,000 to the shareholders of Siddons Industries. We all suffer from a natural parochial interest. I see business experience as an asset in contributing to the decision making process of parliament. Nevertheless, when one stands to profit so clearly, as in the cases-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (10.19)-1 should like tonight to voice my concern and the concern of my electors about the way in which the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) and his Department treat many of our war veterans. Although this matter has been raised many times in this House, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs remains as intransigent as his Department. Furthermore, the Minister has accused me, in a letter and in the local Press, of seeking to make political capital because of my efforts to achieve a long denied benefit for one of my constituents. I am raising this matter to let honourable members judge for themselves.
In April this year a constituent of mine, a World War II veteran, came to me complaining about undue delays regarding his total and permanent incapacity pension. The veteran, who, by the

way, is a very ill elderly gentleman, was recommended by his repatriation medical officer for the TPI pension in December 1980. For various reasons the Department equivocated on his application until he eventually asked for my intervention to help bring his case to a conclusion. I promptly wrote to the Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Veterans' Affairs pointing out the inordinate delay in this case, indicating that such delays may worsen the veteran's health and requesting an urgent resolution of the matter. As there were further delays, I wrote repeatedly to the Deputy Commissioner as well as to the Minister. Knowing the slow reflexes of the Minister and his Department, I also issued a Press statement to hasten their knee-jerk and help my constituent and, indeed, the many other veterans that suffer from the Department's delaying tactics. I quote from the Moorabbin Standard News of 28 June 1982:
Mr Lewis Kent, MHR for Hotham. has issued a warning to war veterans this week that rampant bureaucracy in the Veterans' Affairs Department is causing outrageous delays in having pension claims settled.
"I have contacted the Minister for Veterans' Affairs to complain about the number of my constituents who have had their cases pigeon-holed." he told The Standard.
Mr Kent said he was advised that approximately 800 claims for pensions had been put aside by the Department pending the outcome of cases in the Federal Court.
"Constituents have told me that some claims have been pending for 18 months," he said.
"The right of one veteran to take his grievance to court should not mean that hundreds of others have to suffer," added Mr Kent.
"It is sheer spite by the department to hold up entitlements to these aged people who fought for their country," he said.
"Most veterans are anxious to have their claims settled and the intransigence of the Department is aggravating their anxiety and ill-helath.
"One constituent I spoke to has a serious heart condition and is on oxygen for 20 hours a day. In this case, and in many others, the Department may succeed where the Japanese failed and bring about his death," Mr Kent concluded.
I am proud to advise the House that my intervention was successful and that the Minister advised me in a letter dated 17 August that my constituent's pension had been increased to the special TPI rate, with effect from 15 July. In the same letter, however, the Minister accused me of being 'more concerned to seek to make political capital than to ascertain the facts'. Let me relate the facts of a couple of other cases to the House.
The widow of a World War II veteran recently contacted me about her husband's 20-year battle with the Department to have his hearing loss attributed to his war service. Ironically, his disability was finally accepted but he died before ever receiving a hearing aid. Another veteran on

872 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Adjournment

whose behalf I have also written to the Minister has complained that his appeal in April 1982 was adjourned so that the Department could obtain further medical evidence. The appointment with the doctor was made for August 1982. This is a delay of four months, merely for a medical appointment. I could go on but I will simply say that I wish that the Minister and his Department would perceive their job as one of trying to help veterans receive their just entitlements instead of endlessly procrastinating and obstructing and denying claims.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.24)-There are four main themes to the nuclear debate which constantly recur and which cannot be explained away by the propagandists and apologists for the nuclear industry. First and foremost is the poor economic future which is facing the industry as a result of the public repudiation of nuclear power stations. Secondly, there is the complete failure of scientists and engineers to develop any satisfactory method of disposing of radioactive waste. Thirdly there is the vulnerability of nuclear power
stations to a multiplicity of accidents involving the release of dangerous radioactivity and, finally, there is the increasing number of nuclear weapons which are multiplying, not only in the military arsenals of the super-powers but also, more frighteningly, in the military arsenals of minor powers
such as Israel and Pakistan.
The continued profitability of the uranium
mining industry depends upon the economic viability of nuclear power generation around the world and the plain fact is that nuclear power has never been economic. It has always been subsidised by governments. The costs of research and development, of the treatment and disposal of waste, the decommissioning of nuclear reactors, such as Three Mile Island, and the supervision of the international and national nuclear fuel cycle are not included in the price of the electricity delivered to the householder.
Governments also grant generous depreciation and investment allowances and special credit and insurance facilities in support of the nuclear industry. In the specific case of the uranium mining industry in Australia the net benefit to the Australian community is likely to very low when the costs of Government concessions to the industry are taken into account. In addition, the costs of the infrastructure for many mining ventures in the form of railways, roads, water supplies and sewerage are provided by the Government. When all of these economic factors are taken into account, economists have estimated that nuclear generated electricity would cost between three and seven times as much as it does at present. I turn now to

the disposal of nuclear waste. We can all recall the triumphant announcement by various leading scientists that the problem has been solved. None of these statements has turned out to be true and no country in the world has been able to find a way of disposing of high level radioactive waste from its nuclear power programs. We have all heard with horror of the wholesale dumping of low radioactive waste in the Pacific Ocean by the Japanese. The canisters containing such waste eventually leak into the ocean with unforeseen long term effects on the oceanic life forms. The disposal of high level radioactive waste poses even
greater hazards and proposals that it be contained in glass, deposited in deep mine shafts or rocketed into space have not been found to be scientifically or economically feasible. Even the synthetic rock concept development by Professor Ringwood at the Australian National University is not yet proven to be more than a laboratory exercise and the cost of the process may add too much to the already high operating costs of nuclear power stations. Reprocessing of the spent fuel is of course another possibility if one is prepared to use unlimited resources in producing plutonium for
nuclear weapons. The economics of reprocessing can be justified only as part of a military capability. I doubt that the Australian people at least would be prepared to foot the bill. At present in the United States of America the spent fuel is stored in ponds at nuclear reactor sites. If no practical solution to the disposal problem is found quickly nuclear power plants in the United States of America will have to close down as the storage ponds become choked with radioactive waste.
The third aspect of the nuclear debate which cannot be ignored by the apologists is the vulnerability of nuclear power stations to accidents. The nuclear industry likes to describe them as incidents but let us not be fooled by newspeak; they are accidents and serious ones at that. These accidents occur not only in power stations but also in uranium mines and in military aircraft, ships and military establishments. The details of many of these accidents have been kept under wraps by the American Government because of its policy that it will neither confirm nor deny the presence of nuclear weapons or components on its military fleets of ships and aircraft. Finally, there is the increasing proliferation of nuclear weapons, the existence of which pose an ever increasing threat to the survival of the human race. No one can doubt that the threat of a nuclear war has prevented the outbreak of a conventional weapons war between the two superpowers, but at what cost? We are constantly on a knife-edge of uncertainty with the ever present possibility

Papers

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 873

that psychologically disturbed world leaders will press the button that will unleash hordes of nuclear warhead rockets. No one nation can win such a war. It is quite conceivable that hundreds of millions of people would die completely unaware that a miclear war had commenced. With intercontinental bombers and ballistic missiles, hydrogen and neutron bombs, multiple warheads, long range cruise missiles, anti-ballistic missiles and multiple independently targeted warheads the variety and extent of the new generation of long range nuclear weapons is staggering in both its complexity and its cost. We must also not forget that with the development of military satellites we are faced with another expensive and dangerous leap into a new dimension of nuclear weapons development. I have brought this serious issue to the attention of the Parliament tonight because quite obviously the Government and others seem to think that the Australian Labor Party has forgotten these matters.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 10.29 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 24 August 1982, pursuant to statute:
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act-Australian Bureau of Statistics-Proposal for collection of information-1982-No. 7-Survey of Health, crime victims, and travel and tourism, January 1983 to January 1984.

Dairy Produce Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 193,
Export Finance and Insurance Corporation ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 195.
Freedom of Information Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 197.
Navigation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 198.
Public Works Committee Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 196.
Quarantine Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 194.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinances-I 982No. 58-House of Assembly (Amendment). No. 59-Liquor (Amendment). No. 60-Seat of Government (Administration) (Amendment) (No.3). No. 61-Electricity (Amendment). No. 62-Nature Conservation (Amendment) (No.2). No. 63-Stock (Amendment). No. 64-Motor Traffic (Amendment) (No.4). No. 65-DogControl (Amendment). No. 66-Architects (Amendment). No. 67-Water Rates (Amendment) (No.2). No. 68-Scaffolding and Lifts (Amendment) (No.2). Regulation-1982No. 33 (Machinery Ordinance). No. 34 (Building Ordinance). No. 35 (Building and Services Ordinance). No. 36 (Flammable Liquids Ordinance). No. 37 (Lakes Ordinance). No. 38 (Motor Traffic Ordinance). No. 39 (Sale of Motor Vehicles Ordinances). No. 40 (Weights and Measures Ordinance).
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendments of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of Queensland and South Australia, dated 10 August 1982.
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications Commission-By-Laws-Australian Telecommunications (Staff)-Amendment No. 37

874 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

VIP Aircraft: Costs
Question No. 3758)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
(I) Was there an under-expenditure of $527 757 in Division 504, 'Conveyance of Governor-General, Ministers of State and Others by RAAF and Department of Transport Aircraft', in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet appropriation in 1980-81.
(2) Was there, in the same period, (a) 302 hours of 'special purpose flying' charged to his Department and (b) 202 hours credited to Division 504 because of an over-estimate by his Department the previous year.
(3) Is the average hourly flying rate for the 3 types of aircraft used by the VIP fleet (No. 34 Squadron) $1045; ifso, is it a fact that the 504 credited hours referred to in part (2) would have cost $526,680; if not, what is the cost of these 504 hours.
(4) How much VIP flying time has been regularly charged to his Department (a) in each of the years 1976-77 to 1979-80 and (b) in 1981-82 to the date of the preparation of the answer to this question.
(5) Is it specified procedure that RAAF pilots maintain their requisite number of flying hours in the carriage of VIPs; if so, where and when was this stipulated.

(a) an estimate of 320 hours for RAAF hours underflown was credited to Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, and
(b) 202 hours were credited because of an over-estimate by Department of Defence in the previous year.
(3) In view of the considerable difference in the operating costs of the three aircraft types the use of an average rate in calculations is not appropriate; recoveries are based on the hours flown by, and operating costs of each aircraft type.
The two components (202 hours and 302 hours) of the 504 hours referred to in the honourable member's question relate to different financial years operations, consequently it is not correct to cost the aggregate as shown.
A credit of $231 ,441 based on April 1980 rates was allowed for the 202 hours over-estimated by Defence in 1979-80, and $276,005 for the 302 hours credited in 1980-81. The balance of the under-expenditure resulted from special purpose flying hours being lower than hours on which estimates were based, partly offset by increased flying hour costs and incidental charges.
(4) (a) The flying hours credited to Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and hence borne by the Department of Defence for the financial years 1976-77 to 1979-80 were:

Financial year

Flying hours

(6) What consideration has been given to RAAF pilots of No. 34 Squadron maintaining their flying hours in ways such .as flights for coastal surveillance, fisheries protection, aerial fire fighting, resources reconnaissance, aerial ambulance and similar purposes.
(7) Is the crediting of costs of the VIP flights to his Department an attempt to hide the real costs of those flights; if not, what is the reason for this practice.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) In his statement to the House of Representatives on 24 October 1967 (Hansard pages 2149 and 2150) the then Prime Minister (Mr Holt) advised that charges to be made against appropriations of the Prime Minister's Department for VIP use of 34 Squadron aircraft would be calculated on a marginal or extra cost basis.
The formula for calculating these costs included provision that where the annual service flying hours fall short of the estimated number of flying hours which the squadron would have flown as an integral part of the RAAF without any VIP flight responsibilities, the cost of the shortfall would be charged against the normal activities of the squadron and the amount otherwise attributable to VIP flights reduced accordingly. This formula has been followed since 1967.
As annual accounts are closed prior to 30 June the claim on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet for the final quarter is based on estimates, with necessary adjustments being effected in the claim for the following quarter. Adjustment can be either a debit or a credit to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
In accordance with the formula outlined above, for the 1980-81 financial year:

1976-77

336

1977-78

239

1978-79

234

1979-80

317

The honourable member may be interested to know that hours credited during the years 1972-73 to 1975-76 were:

Financial year

Flying hours

1972-73

267

1973-74

236

1974-75

401

1975-76

116

(b) The flying hours to be credited to Division 504 are determined when the final quarter claim for the financial year is being prepared; therefore no credits have been allowed to date for the 1981-82 financial year.
(5) RAAF pilots have no such requirement. Pilot currency requirements are fulfilled during any operational or training flight even if the aircraft is empty.
(6) The RAAF pilots in 34 Squadron, maintain their flying hours with their current duties. To use the Squadron for coastal surveillance, fisheries protection and aerial ambulance would be a very uneconomical use of its resources. Aerial firefighting and resources reconnaissance require specialised aircraft not flown by 34 Squadron.
(7) No. As indicated in the answer to (2) above, there has been no change to the charging formula since 1967.
New Airport Site in South Australia
(Question No. 3825)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 16 February 1982 :

Answers to Questions

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 875

(I) Has his attention been drawn to references by an officer of the former Department of Transport to conflict between State and Commonwealth methods of land acquisition, as they affect the selection of a new airport site in South Australia, at the public hearing of the Public Works Committee in Adelaide on 3 December 1981, if so, can he state what is the nature of any conflict.
(2) Have discussions taken place regarding the transfer of ownership of the existing Adelaide Airport; if so, which bodies or individuals have been involved in these discussions and what is the current state of these discussions.
(3) Are facilities at the airport under consideration for sale by the Government; if so, (a) what facilities are they and (b) when can a decision be expected on this question.
(4) Will transfer of ownership of the existing airport be a factor affecting selection of a new airport site; if so, in what way.
(5) Have plans been made as to who would eventually be responsible for construction of a new airport for Adelaide given a relinquishment of Commonwealth ownership.
(6) Has his attention been drawn to the statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions that approvals for airport funding were to await development of a co-ordinated approach to priorities including the scope for private sector airline involvement in construction of facilities and the scope for a more modest standard of facility; if so, will he detail the Government's decisions on these matters in view of the fact that the Government has recently approved funds for an international terminal at Adelaide Airport.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I understand that the problems referred to by the honourable member relate not to conflict between the Commonwealth and the State but to the limitations on each of their respective methods of land acquisition. I am informed that, in the context of securing a new airport site for Adelaide, a major factor in determining the role of the Commonwealth Government is the limits that exist with respect to the Commonwealth's ability to compulsorily acquire land for airport purposes in advance of development. Further, existing State and Local Government legislation limits the degree to which an airport site and its surrounds can be reserved and protected without purchase by the developing authority.
(2) Yes. Preliminary discussions have been held between the Commonwealth and State Governments through the South Australian Airfields Committee. I am advised that the State Government has commissioned consultants to examine various aspects of ownership transfer.
(3) There are currently no specific proposals before Government for the sale of facilities at Adelaide Airport. However, the general issue of future ownership of airports and airport terminals has been referred to an Interdepartmental Committee and will be addressed by Government when it considers the Committee's report.
(4) No.
(5) No.
(6) An Interdepartmental Committee has been studying various aspects of major airport development. Decisions are yet to be taken on the matters to which the honourable member refers. The Government decided that to meet the needs of the people of Adelaide for direct access to international flights it should proceed with the development of an international terminal using the recently established terminal at Townsville as a basis for design.

Defence Programs
(Question No. 4012)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 February 1982:
What (a) progress and (b) total payments must be made on individual defence programs to which the Government is currently committed or has announced will be implemented in each of the next three financial years.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Estimated total Defence contracted commitments at 30 June 1982 totalled $4.9 billion.
I am unable to provide progress and annual payment details for the large number of individual Defence programs. However, estimated expenditure on major capital equipment and facilities programs approved at 30 June 1982 are provided below.

Approved major equipment
Approved facilities

April 1982 prices

1982-83 1983-84 1984-85

$m

$m

$m

555

685

725

120

100

35

Contracts yet to be entered into in respect of major programs commenced at 30 June 1982 could total a further $900m but expenditure phasings are not readily available.
Actual expenditure phasings will also depend on such factors
as progress by individual contractors.

"MAS 'Melbourne'
(Question No. 4246)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) What was the cost of maintaining the aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne in service 1980-81.
(2) What is the estimated yearly cost of operation of HMAS Melbourne in the role allocated to it after the acquisition of HMS Invincible.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Details of actual costs incurred on individual units in service are not held in my Department. Assessments are made based on the apportionment of total operating expenditures for all activities. On this basis the direct operating cost of HMAS Melbourne in 1980-81, including repair costs, was approximately $28m.
(2) HMAS Melbourne has been placed in contingent reserve as a non-operational unit, at a direct cost of $182 000. Following the British Government's decision to withdraw its offer to sell HMS Invincible, the Government is now reexamining the options available to Australia to meet the needs that earlier led the Government to decide to buy HMS Invincible. Depending on the outcome of these considerations there may be a need for interim measures such as re-commissioning HMAS Melbourne.

876 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Reductions in Provisions for Training Armed Services
(Question No. 4248)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) Have any reductions been made in provisions for fuel, ammunition and supplies for training for the armed services during 1981-82.
(2) Does his Department plan any reductions in fuel, ammunition and supplies for training: (a) regular and (b) reserve forces in the future.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A number of training activities were reduced in scope or cancelled in 1981-82. To the extent that these required fuel and other stores, expenditure on such items in 1981-82 was also affected.
(2) Financial allocations for training will be made in the context of the overall Defence allocation and as such the necessary supporting stores and fuels will be consistent with planned levels of training activity.
Skyhawk Aircraft
(Question No. 4249)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) What role will the Skyhawk aircraft play in the remainder of their service life.
(2) [s it intended to continue training programs for naval fixed wing pilots; if so, what role is it anticipated that these pilots will play in the Defence Force once the Skyhawks are retired.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) It was announced on 8 April that the future of the existing fixed-wing aircraft of the Fleet Air Arm would be considered by a Defence working party.
(2) This will be influenced by the above investigation.
Medical Benefits for Health Screening Services
(Question No. 4322)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) Has the Minister or the Department of Health released any new guidelines on payment of medical benefits for health screening services as they relate to periodic screening for sexually transmitted diseases (STD) associated with occupation, for example, prostitution.
(2) Are any health funds refusing to pay benefits for these services; if so, what is (a) the reason for the policy change and (b) the implications of this on the spread of STD.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) Yes. (a) There has been no recent change in policy. The Health Insurance Act was amended on I July 1978 (by adding section 19 (5)) so as to prevent the payment ofmedical benefits for health screening services. It was considered inappropriate that the Medical Benefits Scheme should bear the cost of medical examinations or tests not reasonably required for the treatment of a specific medical condition of the

patient. On this basis, the routine periodic screening of prostitutes does not attract medical benefits. (b) The nonavailability of medical benefits should not have adverse implications concerning the spread of STD. The State and Territory public health authorities provide services to carry out tests to detect the presence of STD. These services are provided without charge. Government responsibility for public health controls, including the spread of STD, rests with the States and the Territories. They have expressed the view that all STD testing should be carried out by the State/Territorial public health services to enable those authorities to be informed fully of the nature and extent of STD in the community. This would improve their ability to deal with the spread of STD in a co-ordinated and systematic manner.
HMS 'Invincible'
(Question No. 4346)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) What are the new arrangements for payment for the purchase of HMS Invincible.
(2) Does the allocation of $81,000,000 in the supplementary estimates mean that the payment program set out in his initial announcement is no longer valid.
(3) [n view of the current operational status of HMS Invincible, will advance payments be made prior to the vessel's return to the United Kingdom, or withdrawal from combat duties.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) On 25 February 1982 my predecessor announced to the House that subject to negotiation of details the Government had decided to purchase HMS Invincible at the total project cost of $478m. It was not expected then that any payments would be made in the financial year 1981-82.
(2) Subsequent negotiations with the United Kingdom Government indicated that an initial payment by Australia could be required on or before 9 July 1982, and provision of an amount of $81.6m was included in the Additional Estimates for this purpose.
(3) The sales Agreement was not formalised and no payments were made to the United Kingdom government in respect of the purchase ofHMS Invincible.
Defence Procurement of Aircraft
(Question No. 4352)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) Why is the appropriation for procurement of aircraft to be substantially underspent for the second consecutive year.
(2) Does the variation of22 per cent in 1980-81 and 55 per cent estimated for the current financial year reflect serious problems in formulation of budget requirements.
(3) [s the underspending on this item caused by a substantial slippage of the FI8 program; ifso, what are the details.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Expenditure under Appropriation Division 234/1/02-Aircraft and associated initial equipment and stores-was less than expected at the time of preparation of the 1981-82 Budget as a result of reductions in planned payments on purchases under United States Foreign Military Sales arrangements. As indicated by my predecessor in his speech to the House on 29 April 1982, such reductions were

Answers to Questions

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 877

made possible following a review with United States authorities of payments and cash flow requirements under Foreign Military Sales orders.
(2) No.
(3) No.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No. 4427)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction. (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Within the Department and statutory authorities under my jurisdiction, Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 has been circulated to all Word Processing and Computing Section Managers. Data Processing and Word Processing Operators are aware of the need for sufficient breaks during the operation of visual display units. Although there is no fixed departmental policy on time period between breaks, procedures are in operation to ensure that adequate breaks are taken.
(b) (i) In each of the regional offices of the Department and in the statutory authorities for which I am regponsible (Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation, Australian National Railways, Australian National Line) the percentage of the working day that designated operators of Screen Based Equipment spend at their screens varies between 50 per cent and lOOper cent, and averages around 75 per cent.
(ii) As a result the time spent by Screen Based Operators on other duties averages 25 per cent.
(c) (i) The amount of keystrokes that operators are expected to complete is based on the Public Service minimum qualification of 55,000 keystrokes per day.
(ii) Actual completion of the keystrokes depends on the proportion of the day spent in each office on keyboard activities but is in line with the Public Service standard rate.
Qantas Airways Ltd
(Question No. 4490)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Australian of 27 April 1982 reporting a recommendation from aviation consultants that Air New Zealand cut staff almost 30 per cent to United States standards, put staff and union representatives on the board of directors to minimise industrial disturbance and investigate partnership with the Australian Government or an Australian airline.

(2) Will he investigate the economics of similar steps for Qantas Airways Ltd, possibly in conjunction with Air Niugini and other Pacific island airlines.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) It would be difficult to translate the consultant's recommendations regarding airline staffing and industrial matters directly into Australian conditions where there is a different social and industrial relations framework. Qantas recently commissioned a comprehensive review of certairi aspects of the Company's organisation by management consultants. 1 understand that Qantas has implemented those recommendations which are intended to strengthen the Company's marketing drive, improve efficiency and provide for the future with planned development of staff.
With regard to any partnership with, or merger of, Qantas and other international airlines it would be inappropriate for Australia to take any initiatives that might be seen by other countries of the region as an attempt by Australia to take over their airlines. The Government, however, would give consideration to any approaches those countries might make on the matters suggested.
Department of Veterans' Affairs: Mr J. Evans
(Question No. 4577)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the evidence given to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment on I April 1982 by Mr John Evans of Melbourne, wherein Mr Evans made statements regarding his dealings with the Department of Veterans' Affairs, the Minister, and his predecessor, and sought a public apology from the Minister.
(2) What steps has the Minister taken as a result of Mr Evans' evidence.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) 1 wrote to Mr Evans on 28 April 1982 detailing my position in relation to the evidence given by him. The following is the text of the letter:
'I have just seen that part of your Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment in which you made certain statements about the nature of contact between us. The thrust of your remarks as reported later in the media is that lowe you an apology for my recent action in regard to the so-called third draft of the Fleming/Evans paper.
I have no wish to exacerbate what appears to have generated a situation of aggravation between us. However, 1 do want you to understand that 1 see no need to apologise for any of my actions in this matter.
On the night of 10 March 1982, when you rang me in a state of some concern that 1 had tabled the document, 1 went over with you the reasons for my so doing. I take the opportunity here to outline to you again those reasons. First, there was a need to counter media claims which had again arisen around that time that the particular information in this document (whatever draft) was 'explosive', 'sensitive' and for such

878 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Answers to Questions

reasons it was being 'suppressed' by the Government. Secondly, with the exception of some lesser items in the document, all of the references had been made available in the Department's bibliography for departmental contact medical officers which contains some 780 references. More important than either of these reasons is the fact that this document, or at least the second draft of it, had been tabled on 24 March 1981 in the Senate.
It was therefore almost 12 months after the tabling by Senator Grimes of the second draft and a media revival of interest (which 1had thought to have died) particularly in the 'third' draft that I took the opportunity to table it. There are several points in relation to this which ought also to be made. The first is that in no significant way does draft 'three' differ from that tabled by Senator Grimes a year ago. The second is that, as I did prior to the tabling in 1981 by Senator Grimes, I indicated I was unclear as to the 'ownership' of the information contained in the document and referred to in your role in its preparation. I am satisfied that my action has at least clarified your position and that of the Department in relation to the attribution of the material.
I am puzzled as to why, when 12 months earlier you made no objection to the actions of Senator Grimes, you now so vehemently object to my virtually repeating his action. I simply do not understand why you have acted in what is clearly a contradictory manner in respect of the two occasions but repeat my observation to you on the evening of 10th March 1982, that, with the tabling of the document on 24 March 1981, I was and still am of the view that the matter is now finally put to rest.
I intend to send a copy of this note to the Chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment and, beyond that, consider the matter closed'.
Priorities for Ethnic Communities
(Question No. 4612)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982.
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the views of Richard Rodriguez on page 92 of Time, 19 April 1982
(2) Is it a fact that the interests of migrants do not necessarily coincide with those professional ethnics who wish to maintain a reservoir of non-English speaking, culturally distinct communities.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as foilows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes. I should also add that the Australian Government is committed to the preservation and development of a culturally diversified but socially cohesive Australian society, free of racial tensions and offering equality of opportunity to all those living here. The policy recognises the rights of persons to foster and preserve their cultural heritages and languages. However, this does not imply support for the formation of enclaves which limit contact with mainstream society and institutions. The Government recognises the importance of proficiency in English for all Australians to facilitate communications and equality of opportunity. Significant resources are being outlayed to provide English language learning opportunities for persons unable to speak English proficiently.

Department of Transport Reorganisation
(Question No. 4616)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
With reference to the recent statement about the proposed reorganisation of the Department of Transport and the divorcing of the aviation divisions from the surface transport divisions, (a) do any of the additional estimates of expenditure take into account the extra costs related to this exercise; if so, in what section of the additional estimates of expe:Jditure are these costs contained, if not, what additional costs are to be incurred by the departmental reorganisation, in particular,
(i) what is the quantum of such costs,
(ii) is the proposed aviation division to be established in separate and distinct offices from the surface transport divisions and
(iii) is the continuing process of compulsory staff transfers from Central Office, Melbourne to Canberra to continue for the aviation division,
(b) in relation to administiative responsibility, does the Secretary of the Department continue to exercise control, real or implied, over the officers employed in the proposed aviation division and
(c) as statements on the proposed new aviation division indicate that there is to be a decrease in second division positions, but an increase in salaries of those second division positions retained, what second division positions are to
(i) be elimimated,
(ii) be retained and
(ii) in relation to part (c) (ii),what is
(A) the existing salary and classification of the second division positions and
(B) the proposed salary after the reorganisation of the new aviation division.
Mr Fife-The response to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(a) (i) and (ii) Owing to the Government's recent initiative to change existing administrative arrangements including the establishment of a separate Department of Aviation, these questions are not relevant.
(a) (iii) The program for transfer of staff from Central Office Melbourne to Canberra will be unchanged by the new arrangements.
(b) Owing to changed administrative arrangements this question is no longer relevant.
(c) (i), (ii) and (iii) Statements relating to a decrease in the number of second division positions referred to the former Department of Transport as a whole and not to the former Office of Civil Aviation.
The reorganisation of the former Department of Transport involved considerable rationalisation of functions and reorganisation of Divisions and Branches. Given the changed administrative arrangements which involved creation of the separate Department of Aviation, it would not be meaningful to attempt to identify positions in terms of those that were preexisting and those that are new.
Air Service Subsidy Payments
(Question No. 4620)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:

Answers to Questions

24 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 879

(I) Has his Department now completed negotiations with operators receiving air service subsidy payments for 1981-82.
(2) Is the additional air service subsidy payment paid to T.A.A. made in conjunction with an equal subsidy payment from the Queensland Government.
(3) In relation to the north Queensland T.A.A. air service, are the Fokker aircraft underutilised both in the carriage of freight and passengers; if so, is the Commonwealth Government subsidising an inefficient air service.
(4) For the north Queensland air services, what are the passenger and freight loadfactors for the years 1979-80 and 1980-81.
(5) In view of the extensive losses sustained on its north Queensland subsidised air services, is T.A.A. to reduce the frequencies of air services; if so, what are the reductions contemplated.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes.
(3) Traffic over the Western Queensland routes being subsidised has been insufficient to sustain an economically viable service. A subsidy is provided by the Commonwealth and State Governments in order to maintain T.A.A.'s airline services to Western Queensland centres with F27 type aircraft. An explicit subsidy is provided in accordance with the acceptance by the Commonwealth of the Holcroft Committee of Inquiry recommendations concerning the reduction of incidence of cross-subsidisation and the provision of air service subsidies.
(4) Load factors published by the Department of Transport for the Western Queensland routes relevant to the provision of subsidy are, 1979-80 50.9 per cent, 1980-81 46.9 per cent.
(5) Variations to the frequency of services before and after May 1982 are as follows:

Before

Brisbane/Central Queensland (return services per week)

Roma

4

Mitchell

I

Charleville

5

Blackall

3

Isisford

I

Longreach

4

Aramac

I

Muttaburra

I

Winton

2

Quilpie

Windorah Birdsville Alice Springs

Townsville/Mount Isa (return services per week)

Townsville

7

Charters Towers

I

Hughenden

4

Richmond

4

Julia Creek

4

Cloncurry

4

Mount Isa

7

After
4 I 4 3 I 3
4 I 3 3 3 3 4

Indian Ocean: Soviet Naval Presence
(Question No. 4641)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
Further to my question No. 2193 regarding the continued build-up of a Soviet naval presence in the Indian Ocean region,
(a) what is the extent of the naval facility presently available to Soviet ships at Maputo in Mozambique and has that facility recently been greatly expanded,
(b) what degree of access to workshops and rail communications do the Soviets enjoy at Beira and Nacala in Mozambique and are these workshops, which originally were established by the Portuguese, capable of producing fuel tankers for the rail-system and thereby supplementing the re-supply of Soviet vessels,
(c) what naval facilities are presently available to Soviet vessels in Angola,
(d) is the Soviet naval facility at Aden in The People's Democratic of Yemen, along with the facility already available on the island of Socotra, being expanded; if so, to what extent and what are the likely strategic implications of this expansion for the region as a whole,
(e) is the Soviet naval repair and supply facility on the island of Dahlak in Ethiopia also being upgraded,
(f) is the Soviet Union presently constructing a new naval base at the Bay of At Turbah on the South Yemen mainland near the island of Perim and what strategic significance would such a base have in controlling access to the Red Sea,
(g) in the light of this rapid build-up of a permanent Soviet naval presence in the region,
(i) what are the immediate strategic implications for the non-Marxist governments in the area,
(ii) what are the long-term strategic implications for those countries which must rely upon unrestricted lines of communications through the Indian Ocean-Red Sea region,
(iii) to what extent are lines of communication in the Atlantic made vulnerable by the presence of expanding Soviet bases on the East African coast, and
(iv) what are the implications of a Soviet control over access to the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden,
(h) have the British any naval bases or communication centres at all on the east or west of the South African coast or off-shore, and
(j) what countries have naval facilities in:
(i) the Indian Ocean,
(ii) the Gulf of Aden, and
(iii) the Red Sea.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The port of Maputo is capable of accommodating, and providing standard port services for, submarines and surface combatants to cruiser size. Its capability was enhanced by the arrival of a Soviet-built KLAIPEDA-class dry-dock in late 1981. Port activities are supported by Soviet technicians and harb,our pilots.
(b) Information is not available to confirm Soviet naval use of workshops or rail communications at Beira or Nacala.

880 REPRESENTATIVES 24 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(c) Port facilities at Luanda and Mocamedes are known to include berthing, bunkering and water. A radio communication station at Luanda reported to be operate by the Soviet Fisheries Directorate has also been established in recent years.
(d) to (f) A floating dock has been moored at Dahlak Island several years and a large pier and other facilities constructed there. Information is not available to confirm significant development for Soviet naval purposes there or at Aden, Socotra or at Turbah.
(g) The Soviet naval presence in the Indian Ocean is drawn from the Soviet Pacific and other fleets. It makes extensive use of afloat support, thereby limiting dependence on access to shore facilities within the region. There is no evidence of an increase in the level of presence in the last two years.
(h) to (j) Virtually all littoral countries have ports and facilities which can be used by naval forces. Both US and British forces have access to the facilities constructed by the United States on the British island of Diego Garcia. The US Navy also uses Bahrain as the principal port of call for its standing Middle East Force. The Soviet Union makes frequent use of Dahlak Island, Aden and the Socotra anchorage. French naval forces continue to make use of facilities at Djibouti, as well as of those in the French possession of Reunion.
University of Queensland Fund
(Question No. 4670)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the recently launched University of Queensland fund and its aim to provide a pool of funds to help finance research at the university because of a lack of such funds from the Government.
(2) Did the Queensland Government help launch the foundation with a grant of $1 00000.
(3) In view of the fact that university research benefits all Australians will the Minister request the Government to at least match the Queensland Government's contribution.
Mr FifeThe Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) Press reports concerning the University of Queensland foundation and the State Government's contribution to it have been drawn to my attention. I have noted the

intended purposes of the foundation and I commend the University of Queensland for its initiative in seeking outside funds for its research programs.
(3) For each year of the 1982:84 triennium, the Commonwealth is making nearly $84 million available to the University of Queensland for general teaching and research purposes. In addition, the University of Queensland, along with other universities, is receiving a significant increase in special research grants over the present triennium, as recommended by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission. The following table shows the level of such funds which the University of Queensland is receiving in each year of the triennium, compared with the level it received in 1981:
1981--$864 000, 1982-$885000, 1983-$1 095000, 1984-$1 480000.
The University of Queensland also benefits from the substantial funds which are made available to universities for research purposes through Commonwealth agencies other than the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission.
It would not be appropriate for the Commonwealth to make a direct contribution to the University of Queensland Fund or to similar funds established by other universities.

River Murray Commission: Water Quality Monitoring Program

(Question No. 4703)

Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:,

What contribution does the Commonwealth make to the

River Murray Commission's Water Quality Monitoring

Program.

-

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Funds for the River Murray Commission's Water Quality Monitoring Program are included in the Commission's operat-
ing and maintenance expenses, which are shared by New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia. However, funds for the Water Quality Management Study are included in the
Commission's capital account, towards which the Commonwealth contributes one quarter. $75000 is included in Division 929-4 of Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1982-83 for the study.


