House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Thursday, 12 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and StGeorge, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of StJohn of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-Gerreral

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.C. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourgb]e Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members ofthe House of Representatives
Speaker-The Righi Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.C.M.G., Q.C. Chairman ofCommillees and DeputySpeaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen ofCommittees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader ofthe House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader ofthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Lepderofthe Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader ofthe Liberal Party ofAustralia-The Righi Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader ofthe Liberal Party ofAustralia-The Righi Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G.
Leader ofthe National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader ofthe National Country Party ofAustralia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader ofthe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader ofthe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.C. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Goodluck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, W.A. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, W.A.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, W.A.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, W A. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, W.A. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,W.A. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.C.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, K.C.M.G., Q.C.
Spender, John Michael, Q.C. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, W.A. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, W.A. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, W.A. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, W.A. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, W.A. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Goodluck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher ofthe Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk ofCommittees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk ofthe House-J. A. Petti fer, C.B.E. Deputy Clerk ofthe House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the BeefIndustry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tarilf Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tarilf (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

12 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 701

Thursday, 12 March 1981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1 0.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition ofcertain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of chil dren's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Kent, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mountford, Mr Scott and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
National Health Scheme
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and in sulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulin dependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily ac cording to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions re vert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell, Mr Cunningham, Mr Dawkins, Mr Duffy, Mr Howe, Mr Milton and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled, the petition of the undersigned re spectfully showeth that the projected decision by the Govern ment to abolish social security payments for all those under eighteen years of age should not be proceeded with on the fol lowing grounds: I . The proposal by the Government is in direct contra
vention to a major recommendation from the National Youth Conference held in Canberra, 1979. 2. The proposal will further detract from the ability of young people to make decisions about their own lives. 3. The proposal implies a denial of the right to work for the under 18 age group, by denying them benefits when they can legally leave school and enter the work force. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Members of Par liament assembled should take all possible steps to abandon

any decision made by the Government to abolish social secur ity payments for persons under the age of eighteen years.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country does not have the support of the people; That the change is causing and will continue to cause, wide spread, serious and costly problems; That the compulsory tactics being used to force the change are a violation of all democratic principles.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed to ensure that the people are free to utilize whichever system they prefer and so enable the return to imperial weights and measures wherever the people so desire; That weather reporting be as it was prior to the passing of the Metric Conversion Act; That the Australian Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional mile units to be restored to our highways; That the Australian Government request the State Govern ments to procure that the imperial and metric systems be taught together in schools.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman. Petition received.
Determination No. 503 of 1 980
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Government's move in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1 980 which was granted by the full bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has:
(a) placed in jeopardy the future viability of the Concili ation and Arbitration Commission,
(b) and has created a dangerous precedent for trade unions in general, by refusing to accept the umpire's decision.
2. That the Government has acted in complicity with the Public Service Board in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1 980 and is thereby attempting to deny Government employees a fair hearing on matters related to redundancy and retrenchment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will:
(a) reject any moves to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 and to exclude arbitral jurisdiction over any aspect of redundancy redeployment, retrenchment and retirement;
(b) repeal existing powers to disallow arbitration determinations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.

702 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Petitions

Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the under signed citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1 . Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international cor porations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have. been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid ofartificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests ofgrowers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, render ing them vulnerable to disease and other environmen tal threats.
2. Recognise the maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such geneticdiversityas a public resource and to pre vent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gar deners, independent Australian seed companies and their em ployees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden pro duce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment ofplant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That parents with dependent children bear a dispropor tionate share of the tax burden:
That the recent substantial increase in the dependent spouse rebate does not go to all parents;
That family allowances do benefit all parents with dependent children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That family allowances be increased immediately, and That family allowances be indexed but not taxed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Uren.
Petition received.
Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet ition of certain citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two air line domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government. That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visit ing New South Wales and vice versa.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray tbat the Govern ment will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton, Mr Rocher and Mr Tuckey. Petitions received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Pet ition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only incon venient but is affecting families, business concerns and .em ployment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Govern ment direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free. Petition received.
Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet ition of the undersigned members of the community of South Australia respectfully showeth:
That the severe budget cut this financial year of $80,000 below the amount needed to maintain the current level of op erations, will drastically reduce the effectiveness of the Abor iginal Community College, North Adelaide, South Australia.
That despite ministerial assurances that the College's level of operations would be maintained, the budget cuts will cause the first reduction ofstudent numbers since 1976.
That despite policies of self-management for Aboriginal people, the Aboriginal management of the College and of the Pre-Vocational Training Vnit is considered to be under threat.
That the College is not at this time being adequately in volved in discussions which concern the evaluation report and the future of this College.
That the indicated take over of the Pre-Vocational Training Vnit by the Department of Further Education is contrary to the wishes of the Aboriginal people.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will: Advise your department to allocate additional funds to the College for the current financial year to allow maintenance of the level ofoperations that have appliedsince 1976. Assure the College that it will be fully involved in dis cussions over the evaluation report and its recommendations before any decisions are taken on the future funding and man agement of the College, and instruct your department's offices accordingly. Advise the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs that it is desirable to extend funding of the Pre-Vocational Training V nit for a further year to allow full discussions and negotiations to take place on its future administrative and financial arrangements. Ensure that the future of the Aboriginal Community Col lege is guaranteed by a permanent source of funding and the effective retention of its management and control by members of the Aboriginal community.

Questions Without Notice

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 703

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford. Petition received.
ADELAIDE AIRPORT
Notice of MQtion Mr JACOBI ( Hawker)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, noting the concern expressed by persons residing in the vicinity of Adelaide Airport, calls on the Minis ter for Transport to-
( I ) Estblish noise monitoring facilities to record and
measureaircraft noise levels in the vicinity of Adelaide Airport, and (2) Give firm assurances that(a) The current curfew at Adelaide Airport will be
maintained with allowances only for emergencies, and (b) No action will be taken to expand the Airport be yond its present boundaries.
THIRTY-FIVE HOUR WORKING WEEK
Notice of Motion Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
( I) expresses concern that the pursuance of the goal of the
35 hour week will have disastrous effects on the Aus tralian economy, and (2) calls on those members of unions and others presently advocating a 35 hour week to reverse their stand and support the continuation of the 40 hour week as the positive basis for increasing employment and the real wages of Australian workers.
YOUNG PEOPLE: UNEMPLOYMENT
Notice of Motion Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, noting that unemployment amongst young people under 1 8 years of age is nearly three times that of the national average-
( I ) condemns any attempt by the Government to remove unemployment benefits from under 1 8-year-olds;
(2) calls on the Government to introduce a comprehen sive job creation scheme for young people, and
(3) calls on the Government to increase funds for career and vocational programs in schools throughout the Commonwealth.
AGE PENSIONS: MEANS TEST
Notice ofMotion Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House( 1 ) condemns the Government for having introduced
political considerations into the payment of pensions by its reimposition ofa means test on age pensions paid to pensioners over 70 years of age, and (2) calls on the Government to remove the means test on pensionincreases forpensioners over 70 years ofage at the earliest possible opportunity.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BS2 BOMBERS Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. I refer to the diplomatic note incorporated in Hansard last evening an nouncing an agreement between Australia and the United States for B52 flights into or over Australia. I ask the right honourable gentleman whether he will advise the House of the meaning of the phrase 'strategic and operational develop ments' in clause (VII) of the diplomatic note. Does it not embrace nuclear capacity? Is that why in clause (VIII) there is a reference to the non proliferation treaty? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman has been trying to suggest that clause (VII) overrides other clauses in the agreement. Of course it does not. It is normal, I would have thought, for there to be consultation between the Government of Australia and the Government of the United States about strategic and operational developments of a wide variety. There is nothing unusual in the clause. I refer the honourable gentleman to the first clause which, of course, is the one of overriding importance, and which reads:
The B52 staging operations shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes. The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
That is absolute. I also indicate to the House that if the agreement of the Government of Australia were sought and given for any other category of operations I, or the Minister, would advise the House at the time of its being done. The Parlia ment would be able to debate that agreement if it wished to do so. I also draw the honourable gentleman's attention to the second clause which says, in quite detailed terms:
The operations shall consist of periodic deployments through Darwin of up to three B52 and six KC135 aircraft, supported by about 100 USAF personnel and associated equipment. En route to or from Darwin the B52s may conduct low-level navigation training over Australia on the basis of the arrangements announced by the Australian Minister for De fence on 3 February 1 980.
The second paragraph of that announcement reads:
Announcing this today, the Minister for Defence, Mr D. J. Killen, said that the aircraft, based in Guam, would be un armed and would carry no bombs.
That, again, indicates a consistency with what the Australian Government is doing. I refer now to the first words of the last paragraph of the agree ment which read:

704 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

I n considering whether to agree-
I emphasise the word 'agree'. It is not a question of the United States consulting with us or what ever. It is a question of the Australian Govern ment's having to agree to any changes. The para graph provides:
In considering whether to agree to any request for alteration of the terms ofthis Agreement-
Which means an alteration in the terms in which the aircraft may lise the Royal Australian Air Force base at Darwin-
the Government of Australia shall give weight to its inter national commitments-
The clause also mentions the non-proliferation treaty and the security treaties between Australia, New Zealand and the United States. I think it would be fair enough to say-J hope the honour able gentleman will accept this-that if we were to agree to any changes to the arrangements that have been announced to this House, all Australia's treaty commitments would be in the mind of the Government at the time it comes to a decision. The honourable gentleman would serve himself much better if he accepted the totality of the agreement and the statement made last night as giving the whole of the story. That is what the agreement does. It is plain and open. The honour able gentleman does not do much service, I think, by making the kind of allegations he has over the lat 24 hours. APPRENTICESHIPS: REBATE SCHEME
Mr RUDDOCK-My question is addressed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. The Government has announced a cash bonus re bate scheme for additional apprentices employed in the metal, electrical and building trades. Can the Minister tell me what response there has been to this scheme and whether it will continue to op erate next year?
Mr VINER-I thank the honourable gentle man for his question. The $ 1 ,000 bonus under the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training Scheme to employers to take on ad ditional apprentices has been a very successful scheme. Until now 1 0,4 1 0 claims have been paid out. We expect, from information coming through the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, that a total of 1 3,500 additional appren tices will attract the rebate for 1 979-80. That figure was far beyond our expectation when we announced the scheme for that year. We had thought it might attract about 5,000 applications. Honourable members can see that a lift to 1 3,500 is a very considerable mark of the success of the program.

On the recommendation of the State and Com

monwealth labour Ministers in September of last

year the Commonwealth extended this scheme to

include the key areas of the metal, electrical and

building trades. Those trade areas were identified

as te uplIft

m?ntehsev:mhtearkeewoefnaepepdreedntti?cegsettoa

further sharp cope with the

demand for skilled labour in the middle 1 980s.

The result of that is that in 1 979-80 we had a

record intake of apprentices. That in turn resulted

in a record number of apprentices in training. The

preliminary evidence which my Department has

from State authorities indicates that there will be

a further record intake of apprentices in the

1980-81 period.

However, at the Ministers for labour confer ence in Hobart last Friday, concern was expressed by the State Ministers that some employers may be postponing decisions to take on additional ap prentices until next year in expectation of the scheme continuing. Therefore, it was recom tmheenMdmdl.sbtyerthfoorseInSdtautsetrMialinRisetleartsiotonsm, ayncdomlleeatghuaet, the scheme not be continued next year. I have to inform the House that the $ 1 ,000 bonus scheme will end as at 30 June this year. I would ask all em ployers to make their decisions now to increase even further the number of apprentices that they have and I would ask those who have not taken on apprentices to do so so that they can get the benefit of the $1 ,000 tax free cash bonus.

B52 BOMBERS

Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Minis ter for Foreign Affairs. Why is there no express undertaking in the exchange of letters between the United States of America and Australia that 852 aircraft staging through Darwin will not be armed or carry nuclear weapons? Is it a fact that the Minister has both oral and written assurances from the United States Secretary of State on this matter? If so, why were these private assurances not included in the exchange of notes? Will the Minister table any written undertaking?

Mr STREET--As the Prime Minister said yes terday and has reaffirmed this morning, it has been agreed between the Australian Government and the United States Administration that the air craft staging through Darwin for the quite specific purposes of surveillance and navigational training will be unarmed and carry no bombs. It was on this specific point that 1 sought and received an as surance from the Secretary of State, Mr Haig.

Mr Uren-In writing?

Mr STREET-That document is not a signed document. It was an agreed form of words exchanged between us which is in the keeping of

Questions Without Notice

1 2 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 705

the Australian Embassy in Washington. The form of the words was agreed and exchanged before witnesses.
Mr Hayden-Will you produce this sort of documentation and any other relevant docu ments? Will you table it in the Parliament?
Mr STREET-I am quite sure that I can get a copy for the honourable gentleman.
Mr Hayden-Are there any other relevant documents that you can table?
Mr STREET-No. There are no other rel evant documents. All documents we have been talking about were tabled by the Prime Minister last night.
I make the point that the Labor Party's refusal to accept the unequivocal assurance that I was given by the Secretary of State of the United States and as stated by the Prime Minister this morning exposes the whole attitude of the Labor Party to Australia's foreign relations. The two parts of the amendment moved by the Opposition last night in relation to the tabled agreement de serve the closest scrutiny. 80th demonstrate with out any doubt that the left wing bias of the Labor Party will not allow it to accept a partnership al liance with the United States. Instead, the Labor Party is always trying to arouse suspicion and undermine the mutual trust that must be an essen tial element of our relationship with our allies, in cluding in this case the United States.
The Prime Minister's statement and the latest agreement demonstrate that for its part this Government is prepared and willing to meet its obligations as a partner with a valued ally, while always as its prime responsibility maintaining Australian sovereignty. When it comes to the American alliance all the Labor Party can offer is its tired old socialist platitudes which are com pletely out of thinking with the Australian elec torate. If Labor Party members have any doubt about that I remind them that there was an elec tion in this country a few months ago. Their spine less foreign policies were one very good reason why they sit on the Opposition side of the House and we sit on the Government side.
GOODOOGA Mr LUSHER-Is the Minister for Transport aware that Goodooga has been awarded the title of the most boring town in Australia by the Aus tralian Broadcasting Commission radio program AM? Is Goodooga in the electorate of the Minis ter? Is the award a reflection of the representation enjoyed by Goodooga in this place? Does the Minister intend to use his influence to improve road access to and from Goodooga so that tourism

may be encouraged? Will he support the location of a new international air terminal at Goodooga in an effort to provide a more cosmopolitan at mosphere? What other pork-barrelling is the Minister able to engage in to ensure that Goodooga does not win this prestigious award next year?
Mr HUNT-I followed the AM program with great interest. A number of towns in my electorate were nominated, as indeed were one or two in the electorate of Hume. Goodooga is not a boring place. I challenge anybody to go to the Goodooga pub on a Saturday night and have a few beers. By gosh, it is a lively place; there is not the slightest doubt about that.
The district has been through a very difficult time. It is going through its third year of drought. One of the great problems Goodooga has at present is that the rain dancers cannot get their act together. There is a great bloke in Goodooga called Shillin' Jackson, who broke his leg. He has a son called Sixpence. They and two other men called Robin Quartpot and Bertie Powell are well known as rain dancers. Unfortunately, I do not think this ruddy drought will break until the rain dancers can get their act together. I hope that by the time the drought does break we will have a road system to and from Goodooga that will be far superior to anything that has existed there be fore. The New South Wales Minister for Main Roads recommended that we spend $226,000 on upgrading the Goodooga road to 8rewarrina and Walgett. So I am sure that road access will be improved. I hope that we do not have to go out to Goodooga to get over our international air ter minal and airport problem with the New South Wales Government.

B52 BOMBERS

Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Defence

whether he is correctly reported on page 1 of this

morning's Canberra Times by his favourite

c, hro. nic. lert,heFrManinkisteCrrafnosrtoDn,efwenhceen,

he Mr

stated: Killen,

said the suggestion'-that is the suggestion in re

lation to the B52s using Australian facilities

'had been put to the United States by Australia'.

He went on to quote the Minister directly as

stating:

The matter was raised by the Prime Minister and I raised it . . . It has been put to them (to the United States) that it could well be of assistance if those aircraft were staged through Darwin.

If that is a correct report, how does the Minister reconcile it with statements made last year by both himself and the Prime Minister that in this matter Australia was simply responding to a

706 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 198 1

Questions Without Notice

United States request and had not initiated the idea? Is this in fact a replay of the misleading way in which the public was encouraged to believe that the United StatcJ had requested Australia to enter the Vietnam conflict when, in fact, the re lease of documents subsequently proved that the request for the invitation had come from a pre vious conservative government of which both the Prime Minister and the Minister were members?
Mr.KILLEN-The facts can be simply stated, and I will state them. It is true that yesterday afternoon I was interviewed by Mr Cranston. He very kindly brought to me the original of a most engaging cartoon in the Canberra Times and, fol lowing that, said: 'Do you mind if I have a dis cussion with you concerning recent developments in the defence arrangements concerning Australia, and touching upon other matters? ' I said that I would find that agreeable. Amongst other things, he asked me what progress had been made concerning negotiations regarding .852 air craft. I told him that I give no indication to any person, journalist or otherwise, as to what busi ness will be raised before Cabinet. I believe that may be another old-fashioned Westminster view but I hold very strongly to that too-that what business is discussed in the Cabinet is for the Cabi net to decide and when the decision is made it is announced. I did discuss with that gentleman the negotiations that my colleague the Foreign Minis ter had been carrying out with the Secretary of State, Mr Alexander Haig. That is quite clear. I did give Mr Cranston the history of that proposal. I am sorry that memory is such an imperfect ve hicle that it is not recalled.
The Prime Minister, on 1 9 February 1 980, after referring to Indian Ocean operations by Australia, said amongst other things:
The Defence Department is discussing with United States authorities ways in which we can assist their forces, which are operating so far from continental USA.
I draw the attention of my honourable friend to Article 2 of the ANZUS agreement which, in quite explicit terms, casts upon each of the parties to that agreement a responsibility to discuss how they can assist each other. There is no ambiguity about that. This is not something that stops and starts. It is a continuing process and has always been so regarded.
The next matter to which I draw the attention of my honourable friend is the ANZUS com munique of 27 February 1 980:
The Council took note ofthe decision to allocate greater re sources to defence announced by the Prime Minister of Australia . . . They further noted that consultations on joint cooperation at both operational and policy levels take on a new urgency in the uncertain strategic prospects resulting

from the present Southwest Asian crisis, that operational

planning in response to the crisis is well under way, and that

additional explored.

measures

for

military.

cooperation

are

being

In this House on 1 9 March when dealing with the Soviet military preponderance in the Eurasian area I said to the House, amongst other things:

. . . -the United States-must exercise and maintain its logistic supplies across thousands and thousands of miles. Is it not a sober consideration for men . . . of goodwill to say to an ally: 'How can we help you?' I repeat-I have never disguised this-that I have said to the United States authori ties and to British authorities-

That is precisely what J have said to them. At the ANZUS council that was stated. I draw to the attention of the House that at the New South Wales State Conference of the Returned Services League of Australia on 28 May 1 980 I dealt specifically with B52 aircraft and the responsi bility that the United States was discharging. Amongst other things, I said this:

Today the United States ofAmerica . . . discharges a responsibility, an aerial responsibility in the Persian Gulf, with B52 aircraft operating out of Guam, and depending on the winds, they get 3 or 4 drinks of refuelling in the air. I have said to the Prime Minister . . . that I would welcome the Study to see how this nation can assist its friend the United States in the discharge of that responsibility, and an American Naval Team has been in Australia recently, an American Air Team will be here, I think next week, to examine the point as to whether or not we could stage the aircraft through Tindal, Darwin or wherever.

Mr Howe-Is the answer yes?

Mr KILLEN-That was a public meeting. I am giving these details to the House because I think that this is a very serious matter. I would have thought that the honourable gentleman, who brings to politics all the charm of a dilapidated meatworks, would listen. In a Press release I stated:

. . . us Air Force B52s already carry out low-level navi gation training over routes in northern Australia.

And so on. I was referring to the United States Air Force team's visit to Australia. It was related to Australian discussions of ways in which Australia might be able to assist the United States forces. Let me put this finally to the honourable gentle man, and to the House: If he accepts the respon sibilities that reside in Article 2 of the ANZUS agreement let him state so. If he takes the view that the treaty is merely there as a matter of con venience, let him state so. We on this side of the House take the view that the ANZUS agreement gives protection to this country but also gives responsibilities to this country. We propose to re spond in a robust and proper way to those responsibilities.

Questions Without Notice

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 707

NEW SOUTH WALES SHUNTERS' STRIKE
Mr BIRNEY-Is the Minister for Industrial Relations aware that New South Wales railway authority shunters have decided to remain on strike? What effect will this rank and file decision have on the community?
Mr PEACOCK-I am aware of the strike re ferred to by the honourable member. It is a strike by about 1 ,200 shunters who are members of the Australian Railways Union. It has ramifications which extend far beyond the particular issue involved. It is unquestionably interfering with exports of coal and wheat, disrupting the move ment of freight both within New South Wales and between States and causing considerable incon venience to suburban and country rail travellers and interstate passengers. Obviously if the dispute continues the State's production and employment will face serious disruption.
1 am informed that the men decided yesterday-this relates to the second part of the honourable member's question-to continue their strike despite their executive's recommendation that they return to work. I would have hoped that the union members involved could have shown more regard and more concern for the effect of their actions on the State's economy and on the country's economy. Instead, they have decided on precipitate strike action without fully utilising the conciliation procedures. I regret that this strike is yet another example of key workers demonstrat ing a disregard for the impact of their actions on others. Furthermore, this particular rail system has been beset by considerable industrial relations problems over the past few years. Perhaps its record would have been better had the State Government been less acquiescent to industrial pressures on earlier occasions.
B52 BOMBERS Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Defence whether he recalls stating in this Parliament on 9 September last year:
] am now in a position to confirm that the United States Government has sought the agreement of the Australian Government to the staging of these aircraft through Australia-
That is the B52 bombers-
for extended flights into the Indian Ocean.
Why did the Minister not more accurately state to the Parliament then, in the light of what he stated in his last answer to the question, that the United States had responded to the invitation of the Aus- . tralian Government to use these facilities? Why did he seek to mislead by colouring the presen tation of this fact--

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is not entitled to put a question in that form. He can ask for information, but he cannot make an accusation as part of the question.
Mr HAYDEN-Why did the Minister not can didly state to the Parliament on the eve of the last election that in fact the U nited States proposal to use those facilities was in fact a response to the in vitation directly from the Australian Govern ment? Will he cease trying to dress in the tattered raiments of personal political honour in this House in the way in which he has on this matter?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I call the Minister for Defence.
Mr KILLEN-I put to one side the obloquy that the honourable gentleman throws in my di rection. He may make any charge against me that he likes and I will endeavour to remain indifferent to it, but 1 will not remain indifferent--
Dr Theophanous-The Australian people won't though.
Mr KILLEN-Pythagoras, why don't you keep quiet? I must say to my honourable friend that ] will not and cannot remain indifferent to the charge that I have been less than candid with this House or with the country in this matter. I have instanced to the honourable gentleman and to the Parliament this morning the occasions upon which I have made public references to this mat ter. I say to him that 1 find myself weary at times, sitting in that corner day after day, week after week, with nary a question being asked of me.
Mr Hayden-Normally you do not talk. Mr KILLEN-There is the opportunity for the honourable gentleman to question me. I, together with the then Minister for Foreign Affairs, now the Minister for Industrial Relations, stated the position in Washington. It was stated in this House that we had asked the American Govern ment in what way we could help. Let me pin the honourable gentleman down. Does he remain indifferent to the fact that the preponderance of Soviet military might is matched only by the United States? Is he going to say that the security of the Middle East does not matter? An oil tanker goes through the Strait of Hormuz every quarter of an hour. Is the Leader of Her Majesty's Oppo sition indifferent to that or to these significant strategic consequences which would flow from an interruption of the oil supply? Let us hear him on it. He regards this as a thundering great joke. The Australian people will take a contrary view to the honourable gentleman's attitude. This is a very serious matter indeed. It has been stated with

708 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 1 9 8 1

Questions Without Notice

proper candour by the Prime Minister, by the present Foreign Minister, by the former Foreign Minister and by me. Why is it that the honourable gentleman has sought to ask questions on matters that do not touch on the grave issues of this world? He has had any number of opportunities to do so, but he has not taken advantage of them.
DISALLOWED QUESTION Mr Tuckey proceeding to address a question to the TreasurerMr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's question is out of order. Mr Tuckey-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Why has the questionbeen disallowed?

to reduce pressure on capital markets they can contribute directly to a reduction of pressure on capital markets by reducing their own borrowing requirements. That applies not only to Common wealth governments but also to State and local authorities.
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY SUGAR EXPORT POLICY
Mr ADERMANN-Can the Minister for Trade and Resources report to the House the out come of Australia's efforts through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to persuade the European Economic Community to bring its sugar export policy into line with GATT rules?

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will have to pay for such advice. .
Mr Tuckey-Mr Speaker, when? Mr SPEAKER-When the honourable gentle man is suitably equipped with those things which wi1\ help me give him advice.
TAXATION Mr UREN-My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, refers to a comment made on Tues day by the Minister for Trade and Resources in the debate on appropriate taxation measures for mineral resources projects. The Minister said:
In the last two years a number of resource companies have raised more than $ 1 billion on the Australian capital market.
What proportion of those capital raisings has been in the form of Australian equity participation rather than borrowings? To what extent have these capital raisings on the domestic market been in competition with public sector capital raisings for infrastructure provision? Finally, to what extent do the corporate and public sector capital raisings cause crowding out in the capital market to the disadvantage of young home buyers and Australian small businesses seeking finance?
Mr HOWARD-I would have to obtain advice on the actual statistical proportion of total rais ings by the companies referred to in the first part of the honourable gentleman'S question. I am afraid that I do not carry that sort of figure around in my head. In relation to the latter part of the honourable gentleman's question, it is funda mental that there is a certain availability of capi tal in our community. To the extent that there is too much competition for that available capital between public and private sectors interest rates tend to be forced up. That has consequences in particular for the young home buyers and the small business people about whom the honour able gentleman is so concerned. I have said before and I say again that if governments are concerned

Mr ANTHONY-Some time ago Australia formally complained to GATT about the sugar exporting policies of the European Economic Community. We have been concerned for some time about heavily subsidised sugar being put on the world market and causing great damage to the trade. As a result of our complaint to GATT a panel was set up which verified our complaint. The GATT subsequently had discussions with the EEC. On Tuesday this week the council of GATT met and a motion was put forward supporting Australia's complaint. Even though that motion was supported by 1 8 countries, it was vetoed by the EEC. It is an unprecedented procedure for any country to veto such a motion. It has com pletely denigrated the dispute settling procedures of GATT which try to bring about a reasonable resolution of complaints that may come before it. The EEC has undermined the whole standing of GATT in relation to complaints about trade mat ters. It is a very serious issue and one that the Aus tralian Government is concerned about. We will continue to push our case before GATT. At the same time we are concerned about the new agricultural regime coming forward from the EEC particularly as it relates to the export of sugar. It is a matter that has to be faced up to. We will continue to push our case to GATT and not let it be taken for granted that the EEC can veto such measures.
NUCLEAR WEAPONS: ENTRY TO AUSTRALIA
Mr MORRISON-My question is directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. While the Minis ter was in Washington did he seek assurances similar to those relating to 852 aircraft that United States of America nuclear powered attack submarines would not enter Australian ports with nuclear armaments? [fnot, why not?
Mr STREET-The subject was not raised.

Questions Without Notice

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 709

SOIL EROSION Mr IAN CAMERON-I direct my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Our Government has promised $3m towards soil res toration. As there has been extensive erosion on the Darling Downs after major flooding and resto ration work is urgent, when C8n the Queensland Government expect to receive its share of funds promised for this purpose?

Mr ANTHONY-I am well aware of the

tremendous damage that can occur on the Darling

Downs from sudden downpours of rain and of the

irreplaceable loss that results when erosion takes

place. I have witnessed it. This matter is of great

national importance and significance. The

Government announced that funds will be pro

vided for soil erosion control measures. The im

plementation of'these policies, of course, is in the

hands of the States. They have to achieve' some co-ordinated approach between landholders and

government so that measures can be adopted to

prevent these things from happening. But as to

when money will be available for Queensland, I

will have to refer the question to the Minister for

National Development and Energy who is respon

sible for these matters. When that information is

available member.

I

will

provi. de

it

to

the

honourable

NUC.LEAR WEAPONS: ENTRY TO AUSTRALIA
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs a question following that asked of him by the honourable member for St George. In view of the Government's firmly declared concern about nuclear weapons and the need for strict controls on the entry, or potential entry, of nuclear weapons to this country by aircraft, does it share a similar concern about the entry of such weapons by ships, either surface or sub-surface? If so, will the Government seek to establish a similar ar rangement with the Americans in relation to such vessels as the one which it has concluded in re lation to the B52s? If so, when will he commence discussions with the Americans? If not, why not? Why is there a different level of concern about nu clear weapons potentially coming in by sea as against those coming in by air?
MJ' STREET-I draw a distinction between nuclear powered ships and ships which carry nu clear weapons. They may go together; they may n o t . As I understand i t , the previous Government-the Labor Adrriinistration refused American vessels which were nuclear powered access to Australian ports. I further understand that something of the order of 40 per

cent of the United States Navy is nuclear powered.
As I mentioned a moment ago, my discussions in Washington in the context of the defence re lationship, were specifically related to the B52s. There was no reason to raise the other question because arrangements have been going on quite successfully since this Government reversed the decision of the previous government not to allow access of such vessels to Australian ports. But I think the important point to emerge from all this is that the events of the last couple of weeks have made it quite clear that there are two attitudes which dominate Australian Labor Party foreign policy. The first is the line of acting as apologists for the Soviet Union, like the honourable member for Melbourne Ports who wants to exchange de fence attaches--
Mr Hayden-I rise to order. Mr Speaker, I ask you, consistent with your previous rulings, to ask the honourable member to withdraw that com ment, which is objectionable.
Mr Bourchier-Why is it objectionable? Mr Hayden-The honourable member would not like us to say that he was an apologist for the fascists even though there may be some people within the honourable member's ranks who are. Mr SPEAKER-In the past there has been a ruling that it was not unparliamentary to make an accusation against a group as distinct from an in dividual. That is not a ruling which I will con tinue. I think that if an accusation is made against members of the House which, if made against any one of them, would be unparliamentary and offensive, it is in the interests of the comity of this House that it should not be made against all as it could not be made against one. Otherwise, it may become necessary for every member of the group against whom the words are alleged to stand up and personally withdraw himself or herself from the accusation. I will not require the Minister to withdraw because this is a new development in my ruling. But I ask all honourable members to cease using unparliamentary expressions against a group or a l l l1).embes which would be unparliamentary if used against an individual. Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, with respect, I raise a point of order. Naturally, I cannot put my finger on the precedent, but I have debated this issue with you in the past. On a much earlier occasion you ruled that when an allegation is made against the group"-for instance, the Opposition-there was no substance in raising a point of order requir ing withdrawal of that statement, as distinct from when the allegation is made against an identifiable individual. I raised that point with you, Mr

7 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

QUestions Without Notice

Speaker, as , being the precedent and you ruled that so far as you were concerned you would not allow it to apply against the group and would re quire withdrawal. I suggest to you that there is another variation on that earlier ruling in the last Parliament. There seems to be somewhat of an in consistency in this matter. I say that kindly. I recognise the problems of keeping up with these things but the fact is that I have discussed this with you in the past. Another point is that the Minister has not answered the question. He has set off on a provocative exercise.

Mr SPEAKER-Let us deal with one point at a time. The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I indicate to the honourable gentleman that I will look at my previous ruling. [ want the whole House to know the development of my ruling; that is, I will not permit unparliamentary ex pressions to be used against a group if they would be unparliamentary against an individual. 1 am quite sure that the Minister will co-operate by withdrawing the statement if the Leader of the Opposition insists.

Mr UreD-Mr Speaker, I refer to a previous ruling. In 1 977 when I was Deputy Leader of the Labor Party the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Nixon, then the Minister for Transport said that I was following the communist line. I raised a point of order in that regard with you, Mr Speaker. You said that the words were not out of order; they were not unparliamentary. I then asked: Do you mean to say that I can say that the Prime Minister is taking a fascist line?' In fact, you ruled that way.

Mr Holdng-] raise a further point of order, Mr Speaker. I ask the Minister to withdraw the very specific allegation that he directed to me, which I regard as personally offensive.

M r S P E A K E R - I do n o t r e c a l l a n y unparliamentary expression by the Minister for Foreign Affairs directed to the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. 1 ask whether the Minister will withdraw and then proceed with his answer.

Mr STREET-Mr Speaker, naturally I with

draw anything that I said which is in contra

vention of the ruling that you have just given.

MWehlabtouI rsnaeidPoarbtosutI

the am

honourable member for surprised that he finds it

offensive-was that he wanted Australia to

exchange defence attaches with Moscow. That is

something that he said in this House. If he finds

that offensive I say that it is something that he said

himself. If he does not want to say it I can well

understand that. In relation to the first accu

sation, if that is offensive I will rephrase it in this

way: Two attitudes now clearly dominate Labor Party foreign policy. The first is, let us say, a great unwillingness to criticise in any way actions and activities of the Soviet Union. For example, I have not yet heard from any member of the Op position any comment on or criticism of the rather extraordinary statement made in, let us face it, unusual circumstances by the Soviet Ambassador recently. The other attitude running through Labor Party foreign policy and running parallel to that attitude is a distrust and suspicion of the United States of America. That is built into the Labor Party make-up. Its members cannot help themselves in that.
Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker, I draw your atten tion to the irrelevance of the current section of the answer, which is quite different from the earlier section of his answer.
Mr STREET-It is not. Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. It is perfectly clear from earlier answers given by Ministers that the flight of aircraft has a relevance to the presence of Soviet forces in the Indian Ocean. I find that relevant and I find the answer of the Minister for Foreign Affairs likewise. Mr STREET-Thank you, Mr Speaker. Un fortunately, the combination of those two atti tudes of the Labor Party makes it impossible to arrive at any suggestion of bipartisanship in Australia's foreign policy. Mr Scholes-When was the last time you con sulted? How can it be bipartisan if you do not consult? Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio will remain silent. Mr STREET-Frankly, from a national point of view, I think that is regrettable. But equally, from a purely political point of view, I welcome it. Let anybody who is an apologist for the Soviet Union or who distrusts the United States come out of the woodwork-the more often the better. Let those people say it as loudly as they like. Let them be seen and heard by members of this Parlia ment as well as by the wider Australian public. Let them keep on doing it as often as they can. Then let us see how many seats the Labor Party has left after the next election.
B52 BOMBERS Mr JULL-I ask the Prime Minister: Is there in fact any basis for a bipartisan policy in respect of B52 bombers operating through Australia? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Very seriously, I would have believed that there was such a basis

Questions Without Notice

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 7 1 1

and that there ought to be such a basis. The Aus tralian Labor Party has supported and does sup port the ANZUS treaty. The Labor Party, during a period in government, which admittedly was short, did in fact support the continued operation of bases by Australia . and the United States of America on a joint basis. I would have hoped that that attitude would flow through to their time now in Opposition. I also regard it as much prefer able for Australia if a joint approach to these vastly important matters can be maintained. That strengthens the ANZUS treaty, it strengthens Australia and it is less divisive within the com munity. I hope that we can approach the ques tioning and debate on vastly important matters againstthat background with an intention, if it is at all possible, to come to a common view on what is in Australia's interest in these matters.

Recently the honourable gentleman sought and

was given permission to make renewed visits to

and to have renewed briefings on those joint bases.

He will find that, whilst there has been some mod

 est ,Qu,il9ing activity, the purposes and strategic
thr t of those bases are not in any sense different

frorri ' what they were was when the Labor Party

was in power. I hope very much that as a result of

the honourable gentleman's visit to the bases and

renewed briefings which my colleague the Minis

ter for Defence has offered him and the Deputy

Leader of the Opposition, that will be so because,

again, it would be in the interests of Australia if it

were to work out that way. The honourable

gentleman also said something about nuclear

powered ships. I would like to draw a very real

distinction between visits by aircraft and visits by

nuclear powered ships or, if it were to unfold

later, the home porting of nuclear powered ships

in--

'

-

Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order. The Prime Minister has misheard me as he misheard the Deputy Leader of the Opposition a little earlier during Question Time.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not taking a point oCorder. He is making a per sonal explanation.

Mr Hayden-With respect, it will save the House from getting into a state of disorder if I clarify the matter now. I merely spoke about ships carrying nuclear weapons, not about nuclear powered ships. There is a vast difference.

Mr SPEAKER-I must point out to the Leader of the Opposition that a point of order re lates to the Standing Orders. It does not relate to correcting a statement which a member finds he disagrees with. There is an opportunity after Question Time for making a personal explanation

in relation to misrepresentation. I ask the honour able gentleman to comply with the practice of the House.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I point out to the House that there is a very marked difference be tween the operations of aircraft and the oper ations of ships. Changed arrangements, I believe, are needed regarding the kind of assistance that we can offer to the United States, as an ANZUS partner, in matters in which we are in agreement with the tactical and strategic objectives of the United States because they coincide with Australia's very specific national interests. Quite plainly, if a B52 aircraft is to take off from Darwin it is launching a specific mission from Australian soil. That is why I emphasised in Darwin last year and in the statement which I made yesterday that we need to be in agreement with the tactical and strategic objective of any mission launched from Australian soil in that way. That is why agree ment has been given for surveillance and naviga tional flights which are unarmed and which will riot be carrying bombs. If the nature and purpose of the mission are sought to be changed the specific agreement of the Australian Government would be required. Agreement would be required not only as to the nature of the mission but also the weaponry that would be carried.
The purpose of that detailed view on the part of this Government is that if a mission is launched from Darwin it is specifically a tactical mission of one kind. If it were an armed mission it would be against a specific target. It would be quite wrong, a derogation of Australia's sovereignty and a dero gation of responsibility of this Government and this Parliament if any government were to agree to such a mission if the government did not agree with the objectives of the mission. That is a quite different situation from that which applies in re lation to naval ships.
Ships come in to port for rest and replenish ment. Then they might be at sea for many weeks or many months. In the case of nuclear powered ships, as my colleague the Minister for Defence will remind me, it may be for six months at a time or longer. Quite plainly, it is not a question of launching a specific mission from Cockburn Sound or any other Australian port. It is part of the normal patrolling duties of the United States Navy and we have offered support for it, if the United States so wishes. The offer for home port ing or base porting at Cockburn Sound stands, if the United States so wishes. We are not yet aware of the results of a survey mission that it sent here to examine those matters. That will unfold in the coming months, one way or another.

7 1 2 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 1 9 8 1

Questions Without Notice

The United States has many nuclear powered ships and obviously many nuclear armed ships. The former Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, 1 think when he was the Leader of the Opposition, in this House-the record can be checked-made it per fectly plain that the nuclear powers, including the United States, cannot say when a ship is nuclear armed. That would be giving vital tactical and strategic information to an enemy. Therefore it is not possible to say that. Our support and decision to allow United States nuclear powered and, if they are, nuclear armed ships to visit Australian ports stand and will not in any way be diminished. I hope, consistent with the view expressed by Mr Whitlam in relation to the compulsions on the United States on the matter, that view could also be supported by the Opposition.
The Australian Labor Party and the Leader of the Opposition do lay themselves open to charges by the nature of some of their questioning in these matters. I hope that they watch the matter be cause it would be much better if a bipartisan ap proach could be developed and maintained in a fuller sense on defence and foreign policy matters. As I am in a charitable mood this morning, I am prepared to concede that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition misunderstood the fact that sub paragraph (I) overrode and governed the whole of that agreement and was not diminished in any sense by sub-paragraph (VII). I will accept that that was a misunderstanding and nothing more. But I also think that there was some reason to be lieve that there could be a bipartisan approach be cause during the election campaign, when the Leader of the Opposition did not necessarily want all that much pUblicity for a defence debate, he appeared on the Terry Willesee show in Perth on, I think, 29 September. I hope he will not mind if I remind him of what he said. He said:
Similarly on the B52s. We say our friends, our allies as always can use our facilities but we want to know the reasons for their movements so that we're not dragged into some sort of escapade which could have serious implications for us, such as an American raid somewhere in circumstances-
Mr Hurford-That is what we are doing in the questions.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-That is not what Opposition members are doing. They are trying to cast doubt on the whole arrangement. The Leader of the Opposition continued:
Any self-respecting national government would require that as a criterion for operations-
Opposition members interjectingMr MALCOLM FRASERHonourable members opposite should wait to hear what their leader said. He continued:

as a criterion for operations through here and sec ondly there'll be no stockpiling, maintenance or supplying of nuclear weapons within Australia for the B52s; and the Americans don'tintend to-
That is carry nuclear weapons-
And there'd be no reason why they'd carry nuclear weapons anyway.
Again trying to push the question under the car pet, he said:
What would they be bombing with them-whales in the Indian Ocean?
The Leader of the Opposition made it perfectly plain in that pre-election period that he was pre pared to have B52s using Australian bases in pre cisely the circumstances in which they will in fact be using those bases.
UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE Mr HAYDEN ( Ox l e y - Leader o f the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I will take the oppor tunity a little later to correct the misrepresenta tion by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) a few seconds ago. In the meantime, with your in dulgence, I raise with you your ruling concerning whether a statement covering a collectivity of people or a group of people is unparliamentary and should be withdrawn. You will recall your ruling a few seconds ago that when a statement re lated to an individual it certainly should be with drawn. But you said you thought that when a statement referred to a group of people such as the Opposition or the Government it was undesir able; that it would upset the comity of the place. However, although you said you would prefer that it be withdrawn, you did not state that it should be withdrawn. I refer you to page 1 076 of the House of Representatives Hansard of 1 0 Sep tember 1 980. The honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) made a statement which covered all members of the Government. You required that the statement be withdrawn. I said:
. . . when an allegation of the nature made, allegedly, by the honourable member for Port Adelaide is made about a collectivity such as the Government or the Liberal Party, it is acceptable in terms of procedures in this House. When a par ticular person is identified some disputation arises. Can you just briefly outline why you have changed that long-standing ruling?
Mr Speaker, you said:
r have changed it, but not today. I changed i t earlier, indeed last year, because a member on the Government side made an allegation about Ministers ofa former LaborGovernment and that led to all former Ministers of the Labor Government standing and saying: 'It was not L It was not 1'.
I do not need to quote any further. The second column of that page of the Hansard records that the honourable member for Port Adelaide sought to speak. You said:

Questions Without Notice

1 2 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 7 1 3

The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The honourable member well knows that the words I required him to withdraw were a personal reflection upon one or more members.
You required him to withdraw. You did not re quire the Minister for Foreign Affairs to withdraw today. I put it to you that there is a glaring incon sistency in your rulings. Unfortunate and uninten tional as it undoubtedly is, it is of the nature which causes irritation on this side of the House and en courages some people at least to harbour suspicions about rulings from the chair which are not conducive to the harmony of the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition appears to me to be agreeing with the changes adopted in rulings which I have given. What he is objecting to is that on a prior occasion, one on which he has drawn my attention, I have called for a withdrawal whereas today I did not call for a withdrawal. If I have been inconsistent I regret it. The reason I adopted the position I took today was that I felt that the House was not fully aware of the change in the ruling. Obviously, I called for the attention of the House and asked honourable members to listen to me carefully. I drew the attention of all honourable members to it. My in tention was that in the future I would certainly call for withdrawal. I did not on this occasion. I regret that the honourable gentleman finds in it some inconsistency on my part. More especially I regret that he sees it as some basis for suggesting that I am not being objective. I wish to assure him that I am. If there was any inconsistency it was error on my part; I plead guilty to the error. I will look at the remarks. I did, in fact, at a later point call upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs to with draw the unparliamentary remark. The Minister did so. I hope to be consistent in the future and re quirewithdrawal on all occasions.
B52 BOMBERS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, could I, with your indul gence, ask to have incorporated in Hansard one paragraph of a speech by Mr Whitlam on 4 June 1 976, as recorded at page 3041 of Hansard. I recalled what the former Prime Minister had said about visits to Australian ports of nuclear pow ered and nuclear armed warships. My recollection was right but this puts in the record his own pre cise words. I believe it would be helpful to honourable gentlemen if it could be incorporated. Leave granted.
The paragraph read asfollows-
Before I proceed I should make It plain that there is regret tably in the public mind a great deal of confusion about nu clear ships. There is a difference between nuclear armed ships

and nuclear powered ships. Nuclear armed ships presumably only nuclear armed naval ships-have come to Australia for very many years. They have come from several powers. Successive governments have accepted that naval ships these days are quite likely to be nuclear armed. It is im possible to expect the navies of other countries to specify for public consumption which of their ships are nuclear armed and which are not so that any country which is host to those ships may require that only those which are non nuclear armed can come to the ports. If that information and that re quirement are imposed it becomes a matter of public knowl edge which of the ships in any particular navy are nuclear armed and which may not be.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING TRIBUNAL
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) -Pursuant to section 28 of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1 942, I present the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal annual re port 1 979-80, which on this occasion includes the Auditor-General's certification of the Tribunal's financial accounts. Honourable members will be aware that this report was tabled on 26 February 1 98 1 . However, it was subsequently noted that Appendix Y was incomplete. It is now compkte.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE: SPECIAL FLIGHTS
M r K ILLEN ( Moreton-Minister for Defence) -For the information of honourable members, I present details of special flights of the Royal Australian Air Force for the period 1 July 1 980 to 3 1 December 1 980. Copies of this report are available from the Table Office.
COMMONWEALTH LEGAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employ ment and Youth Affairs) -For the information of honourable members, I present general guidelines relating to the provision of financial assistance in proceedings instituted under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1 904.
Also for the information of honourable members, I present guidelines for the provision of legal or financial assistance by the Common wealth, other than under the Conciliation and Ar bitration Act 1904.
REPATRIATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 107VZZA (2) of the Repatriation Act 1 920, I present the annual report 1 979-80 of the Repatri ation Review Tribunal, together with the text of a statement by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs re lating to the report.

1 1 4 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Personal Explanations

PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY Mr SPEAKERI understand that the honour able member for Griffith wishes to lodge a request for detailed information concerning the adminis tration ofparliamentary departments? Mr HUMPHREYS-Yes. I seek information in relation to the operation of the Parliamentary Library. Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable member will submit his request for information to the Clerk and it is in order it will be printed in Hansard. In due course my reply will also appear in Hansard.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS Mr MORRISON (St George) -Mr Speaker I seek leave to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented? Mr MORRISON-Yes, Mr Speaker. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr MORRISON-My attention has been drawn to the transcript of what is called Interview Doorstop of this morning, in which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) was asked:
Prime Minister, on another subject. Mr Bill Morrison today has said when he was a diplomat the KGB tried to recruit him as a spy. Were you aware of that? Do you have any reaction?
The Prime Minister said in response:
Did he say whether they were successful or not?
I strongly resent that imputation impugning my loyalty. The Prime Minister will be aware of the whole episode. If he is not, the relevant files are available in both the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. On my return I had an exhaustive debriefing by ASIO. I want to point out two facts subsequent to that. The Liberal Government appointed me as the deputy in Kuala Lumpur after that event. Later as a Minister of the Crown, I was privy to most of the secrets that are avail able to Ministers of the Crown, including the detailed briefings on Pine Gap. Nobody has ques tioned my loyalty. Nobody can question my loy alty. I find it rather odd that the comment should come from a man who personally trades with what he is anxious to depict as the enemy.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN ( Kingsford Smith)-I claim to have been misrepresented and I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Outside the House this morning the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm

Fraser) announced to the Press of Australia words to this effect: 'Mr Bowen had got up', I assume he meant in Parliament, 'and accused the United States of deception and of lying'. That is a false accusation. I did no such thing. It is the sec ond time in a week that the Prime Minister has deliberately misrepresented me, Further, he tried to suggest to the people to whom he was talking this morning that perhaps my remarks were reported in the newspapers. I have searched all the newspapers this morning and I cannot find anywhere where I am quoted as saying that. If I am reported anywhere as saying that, it is incor rect. The Hansard record shows that my refer ence to deception was to the honourable gentle man himself in bringing in the statement at ten to six last night.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) is correct. I am afraid that the words ] attributed to him as a result of this Press report should have been attributed to his leader.
Mr Lionel Bowen-It makes a big difference to me.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I know that it makes a big difference to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. I accept what he has said. I was surprised when I read it. I apologise to the honourable gentleman for reading it the wrong way. Part of the report of Mr Paul Kelly stated:
Mr Hayden said the ALP was deeply worried about the agreement.
He also raised doubts about the usefulness of such agree ments saying that the United States had 'lied' to and
'deceived' others over the bombing ofKampuchea . . . So it goes on. The next paragraph referred to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Uren-Of course they have lied. Don't you know what that maniac Nixon did? That has been publicly proved.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable member for Reid has just confirmed the word that his leader used. I must say that if the Oppo sition is to continue to use such words, if that re port is accurate, it will make it difficult to main tain the kind of bipartisan approach to defence which I sincerely believe is much in the interests of Australia.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Oppo sition)-I claim to have been misrepresented by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) .
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentle man wish to make a personal explanation?

Personal Explanations

1 2 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 7 1 5

Mr HAYDEN-Yes, III relation to two matters.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr HAYDEN-The two matters which I wish to raise suggest that the Prime Minister is sluggish this morning. The first matter relates to a com ment the Prime Minister made in response to a question . He concluded by claiming that the state ment I had made in Western Australia during the election campaign-this is according to his in terpretation and we know how reliable that is clearly committed the Australian Labor Party to the same sorts of conditions that were laid down in the agreement tabled in this Parliament last night in relation to the operation of B52s through this country. That is not true. It was frequently made clear, including to American Government representatives, that not only would we not allow nuclear weapons to come on to or to travel through this country in B52 aircraft but that that would be a condition of any undertaking or any arrangement about their movements. It would not be a provision that we would have to be told of an intent, rather a total prohibition. There was never any dispute about that. I do not want to delay the House any further except to observe that I say now-I believed it then-that the whole exercise was a stunt drummed up for the election by the Government. The Government sought to incite the Americans by inviting them to use these facili ties. That has now emerged.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now arguing the matter.
Mr HAYDEN-The other matter, if the Prime Minister will display some common courtesy which is foreign to his normal behaviour by re maining in the House for a few seconds--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman can state where he has been misrepresented.
Mr HAYDEN-It was the dishonesty of the Prime Minister a few seconds ago--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is not entitled to use that term. I ask him to withdraw it.
Mr HAYDENIs truth a defence? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will withdraw the remark. Mr HAYDEN-I withdraw it. I should like to quote from the parliamentary record exactly what I did say last night in the Parliament. I said:
Again, we have on the record, to the eternal embarrassment of all parties involved-I contemplate in this case a former Australian Government of the same political ilk as the present

one-the deceit, the downright lying, i n relation to America's bombing raids on Kampuchea.
The deceit was on the part of former President Nixon and former Secretary of State, Dr Kissinger. I stand firmly behind that comment. I inquire whether the Prime Minister or any member of the 'Government would want to deny the content of that assertion. I suggest firstly, however, that they read the book by William Shawcross Sideshow.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is now arguing the matter.
Mr HAYDEN-They put themselves in a very unpleasant light if it is their wish to justify that very unpleasant situation--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask the honourable gentleman to resume his seat.
Mr HAYDEN-in the historical record of the United States in Indo-China.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Op position will resume his seat.
Mr HAYDEN-It was an historical record in which they were deeply and bloodily involved.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Leader of the Oppo sition to pay attention to my request. He knows that I give him great tolerance under the Standing Orders, but when I ask him to resume his seat be cause he is going beyond the bounds of a personal explanation and instead is debating the matter, I ask him to comply with my request: It gives a very bad example to every other member in the House if he does not.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Dr BLEWETT-I do. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Dr BLEWETT-Last evening during the adjournment debate the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume)-this is at page 695 of Hansard-said:
H seems to me that the honourable member for Bonython, having invented some figures to endeavour to disprove my proposition . . .
The accusation that [ invented some figures is without foundation. As indicated in Hansard at page 690, the table referred to was prepared by the Legislative Research Service of the Parlia mentary Library. Thus the charge of inventing some figures impugns the integrity of those ser vices as well as mine. As to the facts in the dispute, I simply invite honourable members to contrast the claims made by the honourable member for

7 1 6 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Ministerfor Employment and Youth Affairs

Macarthur on 26 February 1 98 1 with those he made last night.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr BAUME-I do. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr BAUME-Last night during the adjourn ment debate-as reported at page 690 of Hansard-the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) accused me of being 'a rather shonky manipulator of figures'. As reported at the same page he said:
. . . even one as shonky with figure manipulation as the honourable member for Macarthur . . .
Naturally I find those words offensive, I regret to say that there are no dictionary definitions of the word 'shonky', but I understand it relates to people who are less than honest in their activities. The word 'manipulator' also is offensive in the way it was used by the honourable member for Bonython. 1 will not canvass the correctness or otherwise of the assertions he made in defending that proposition, but I will seek to do so of course at an appropriate time later, perhaps during the adjournment debate tonight. All I wish to stress is this: The figures on which I was accused by the honourable member were 'derived assuming the trend for 1 977-78 and 1 978-79 held in those years', according to the Legislative Research Ser vice of the Parliamentary Library. My objection was to the fact that the honourable member for Bonython, when attacking me, did not concede, admit or refer to the fact that these figures were not official statistics but were in fact simply de rived assuming the continuation of the trend.

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as
would prevent Notice No. I , General Business, being called
on forthwith.

Mr Speaker--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

64

Noes

45

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann,A. E. Baurne, M. E. Birney, R. I. Bourchier. J. W. Bradfield, 1. M. Braithwaite, R, A. Brown, N, A, Bungey, M, H, Burr, M, A. Cadman, A G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, 1. 1, Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D, M, Cowan, D. B. Dean, A G, Dobie, I. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, p, S, Groom, R, 1, Hall , Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N, 1, Hodges, 1. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W, M. Hunt, R. I. D. Hyde, I. M.

Jarman , A . W. Iull, D. F. Katter, R. C. Killen, D. I. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S,A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A, 1, (Teller) McLean, R. M, McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T, Macphee, I. M, Millar, P, C, Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. 1. O'Keefe, F. 1. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A, C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, p, D, Shipton, R, F. Sinclair, I. McC, Spender, 1, M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G, E, 1. Tuckey, C, W, Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE The following Bills were returned from the
Senate without amendment or requests:
Shipping Registration Bill 1 98 1 . Flags Amendment Bill 198 1 . Navigation Amendment Bill 1 98 1 .
SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 24 March next, at 2.1 5 p.m.
MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND YOUTH AFFAIRS
Suspension of Standing Orders Mr HAWKE (Wills) ( 1 1 .49)-1 move:

NOES
Armitage, 1. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell, G. Cass, M, H. Charles, D, E. Cohen, B. Cross , M . D , Cunningham, B . T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, 1. S. Duffy, M. I. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. I. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. 1,

Innes, D,E. Jacobi, R.
Jenkins, H. A. Iohnson,Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R, 1. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, I. B. Milton , P. Morris,P. F. Mountford, I. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, 1. 1. Theophanous, A C. West, S. I. Willis, R . Young, M . J.

Ministerfor Employment and Youth Affairs

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 7 1 7

PAIRS

Moore, J.C.

Child, J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) ( 1 1 .54)-1 second the motion, Mr Speaker. It is without precedent for a Minister, who stands charged with having lied to the Parliament, not to be defended by his colleagues.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is that the suspension of Standing Orders be agreed to.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) ( l 1 .55)-Parliament cannot survive--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Original question put:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 1, General Business, being called on forthwith.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

47

Noes

64

Majority

17

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell, G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy. M . J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R . J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B . L . Humphreys,B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins. H. A Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R.J. Kent,L. Keri n , J . C . Klugman, R . E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uteo, T. West, S . J. Willis, R . Young, M. J.

Adermann, A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, 1. W. Bradfield, J. M . Braithwaite, R. A. Brown. N . A. Bungey, M. H.

NOES

Jarman, A. W. Jull, D. F. Katter, R . C. Killen, D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch. Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller)

NOES
Burr, M. A. Cadman,A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman. H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean. A. G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. Groom. R. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde, J. M.

McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon , P . J . O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R . Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair. I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N.D. Wilson, l. B. C.

PAIRS

Child,l.

Moore, J. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

CANBERRA Ministerial Statement Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the House that I was informed by the Minister for the Capital Ter ritory (Mr Hodgman) that he proposed to ask for leave to make a .short ministerial statement. It is not mentioned on the daily program of business and I confess that I had overlooked his request. I now call the Minister for the Capital Territory. Mr Scholes-I raise a point of order. There is a courtesy in this House that Ministers give copies of ministerial statements to the member of the Opposition who is responsible for the matter. I am the member responsible and I have not received a copy. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. No request has yet been made by the Minister for the Capital Terri tory for leave to make a ministerial statement. Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-I seek leave to make a short statement. Leave granted. Mr HODGMAN-I thank the House. The honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) will appreciate in a moment the reasons for my mak ing the statement. It is my great privilege today to draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that 68 years ago, on 1 2 March 1 9 1 3, the city of Canberra was named-and today is therefore Canberra Day, the birthday of the national capi tal. This great city, this community in which we

7 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Canberra

all share, i s also one i n which we all take consider able pride, and for good reason. The 68 years of its establishment have seen it transformed from a bush settlement to one of the world's most beauti ful cities. Even more importantly, today I believe Canberra is demonstrating as never before that it is the heart of the nation. Therefore, on this birth day I want to stress that Canberra is our national capital and it belongs to all Australians. Because the city's population is drawn from all over the Commonwealth and beyond, it is obvious that visitors are assured of a warm welcome from those who themselves have been visitors but a short time ago.
Mr Barry Jones-Even from Tasmania. Mr HODGMAN-Even from Tasmania, and I am proud of it. On behalf of the city I extend an invitation to all Australians to join, if possible, with the Canberra community in its celebrations over the next few days. Those who are unable to participate in the celebrations should remember that they are always welcome in their national capital. After all, they own it. I can truly say that after 68 years Canberra's growing emphasis on the importance of people will earn national accept ance of the accolade 'Heart of the nation'. Happy birthday, Canberra. Mr FRY ( Fraser)-by leave-I add my con gratulations to the people of Canberra on the city's sixty-eighth birthday. It has been a remark able achievement to transform Canberra from a sheep run to the unique and beautiful city that it is today. It is appropriate to pay tribute to the orig inal planner, Walter Burley Griffin, for the very fine concept he developed. With the exception of the monstrosity on Black Mountain we have adhered to the Burley Griffin concept and still have a unique and beautiful city. Another unique thing about Canberra is that it is the only com munity in Australia that does not have some measure of self-government. ] believe many members of parliament are not aware of the true nature of Canberra. I would like to suggest to them, particularly the new members, that they resolve to overcome that problem by getting into a government car when they have an hour to spare-I am sure that the drivers of those cars will be pleased to act as guides as well as drivers-and really have a good look around the city. It is very noticable that those members of parliament who serve on the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Australian Capital Territory become much better informed and are very impressed with the city. I believe every member of this Parliament shares a responsibility to see that the standards of

Canberra are maintained, as the seat of govern ment and the national capital, and the home of some 230,000 good Australians. If honourable members have a look around the city they will find out also that not everybody lives in affluence. There are pockets of poverty and deprivation. Honourable members will have a better under standing of Canberra if they avail themselves of the opportunity to have a good look at it.

Mrs KELLY (Canberra) -by leave-Our city has achieved greatness in a short time. It is a young city but its population of a quarter of a million has the same aspirations as other Aus tralians, the same concerns about unemployment and inflation, and it wants a fair go. Canberra is also the national capital, a city of which all Aus tralians can be proud, and a city by which we as Australians can be judged. On its birthday it re quires one major gift-a commitment to its future. Canberra's future prosperity depends, more than the future of any other part of Australia, on that commitment from the Federal Government and the people of Canberra. I am pleased that this Parliament has made a major commitment to the construction of the new Par liament House. That will bring new life to the construction industry in this Territory. To ensure that Canberra's future birthdays are prosperous I ask the Government and members of the Oppo sition to make a joint commitment to Canberra as the national capitai and a city with a population of a quarter of a million. Happy birthday to Can berra and best wishes to all its citizens.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-by leave-It is my

responsibility in the Opposition to deal with mat

ters ofpolicy concerning Canberra, not the day to

day affairs which one would expect the members

who represent the area to look after. Canberra is a

unique city in that it is the national capital. It is

also a city which should be accessible to far more

Australians. It visit Canberra

ibsedciaffuicseulot ffotrhseogmreeaAt udsitsrtaalniacnes'into

volved. If the Government is serious about wish

ing Canberra a happy birthday-nobody is in dis

agreement with that-the Minister for the

Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) may well put to

his Government propositions to make it easier for

school children especially those children living in

distant Western Australia, north Queensland and

the Northern Territory to make one visit to the

national capital during their school years. The

cost of a visit for people in New South Wales, Vic

toria and probably some of the nearer parts of

other States is not great. Some consideration .of

this matter would be a worthwhile birthday

present .

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 7 1 9

Every Australian should be proud of his national capital even though it is much maligned especially in the to and fro world of politics and the States' rights argument. It is a capital which has progressed since the site was first chosen. I think it is arguable who determined the site but King O'Malley claimed credit. It is a place to which honourable members often come but do not see much of it. It is now a thriving city and community. Another birthday present which could be given to Canberra is some say in the social structure and the allocation of finances in their city. This is currently lacking.
INDUSTRIAL DISRUPTION: STREET MARCHES
Suspension of Standing Orders Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 2, General Business, being called on forthwith.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) ( 1 2. 1 0)-1 move:
That this House-
( l ) endorses the feelings of those Australians who, by re cent marches, have demonstrated their concern at the frequency of strikes and bans which have so disrupted the everyday life of the ordinary Australian;
(2) urges members of trade unions to demand that their leadership and the executive of the ACTU cease their present confrontation with the Australian community through repeated industrial disruption, and
(3) expresses concern at the unjustifiable effect of strikes and bans on employment opportunities for young and old, their impact on inflation, as well as the inter national reputation of Australia.
Recent marches and rallies in a number of Aus tralian capital cities have been a clear demon stration of the deep concern ofAustralians against the frequency of strikes and bans which have disrupted the everyday life of the ordinary Aus tralian. Union leaders who promote strikes and bans are insensitive to the feelings of the average Australian. Their intransigent attitude, when seated around the negotiating table, is appalling. But these marches and demonstrations of concern by people will count for nothing unless unions and unionists heed the message and the feelings of the masses. The clear message to the unions is that Australians are fed up to the back teeth with the frequent and unreasonable demands of some union members and, in particular, union leaders. Those people who have marched echo the feelings of hundreds and thousands of Australians. In Syd ney some 30,000 people marched in protest. In Brisbane, normally a conservative city, 4,000 people turned out to demonstrate their disap proval. I defy any honourable member in this chamber to state that he has not had expressed to

him widespread concern at the nature and fre quency of the industrial disputes that plague this nation.
Let me deal with the average Australian. Nor mally, Australians do not demonstrate much national pride. When asked what sort of society he wants the average Australian in most cases is stumped for an answer. Pose the same question to a Third World country African or Asian, and he responds quickly by saying: 'Provide me with ad equate fuel, food and shelter'. If Australians re spond they will probably talk about wage justice or say that the level of taxation is too high, the transport system is inadequate or industrial unrest is crippling the country. A large section of the Australian community lives at a standard far above that of their brothers and sisters in other parts of the world.
Yet we do not appreciate what a wonderful nation we have and what outstanding opportuni ties exist here. In times of extreme adversity, such as on the battlefields, Australians have an envi able track record. Our second most notable achievements are on the sporting fields where on a comparative population basis we are up with the top nations. But those areas aside, we fail dismally to exhibit a reasonable measure of nationalism. We have a 'warm the TV and cool the tinnies' mentality. We do not work hard enough, our rate of productivity is too low, and yet we expect high returns and a share in the affluence and prosperity of the country with a minimum of personal effort. There is nothing wrong with enjoying leisure time but we must work at changing our unenviable image of just being a sport loving, beer guzzling, meat pie eating, sun loving nation. With 1 4+ million people Australia has less than one-half of one per cent of the world's population which is in excess of 4,000 million people. In spite of the fact that we are a mere drop in the bucket in popu lation terms, this is an affluent second world power. It is past time we woke up to this as a nation.
Let me turn to the second part of my motion, that is that ordinary rank and file members of trade unions demand-not ask or suggest but demand-that their leadership and the executive of the Australian Council of Trade Unions cease their confrontation with the Australian com munity through repeated i ndustrial disruption.--
Mr Holding-How would you know what rank and file members want?
Mr HODGES-The honourable member will have his opportunity to speak in a moment. I make it clear that this Government supports trade

720 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 1 98 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

unionism. No one quarrels with the basic objec tive of unions-that is to make sure that their members enjoy reasonable work conditions and receive just rewards for their efforts and skills. I believe average unionists expect their leaders to pursue these goals. They do not want their leaders involved in anarchy, standover tactics and thug gery which is becoming the rule rather than the exception.
Frequently we hear union leaders proclaim the need for civil liberties. What they do not recognise is that they themselves constantly impinge on the rights of their members and other Australians. I am talking about the right of union members and others-indeed all Australians-to enjoy an unin terrupted supply ofgoods and services that people in this country are entitled to expect. I am talking about the right of employees to work without fear of intimidation in order to support themselves and their families. I am talking about the right of em ployers to expect continuity of output from em ployees in order that they receive a fair return for their enterprise and investment. I am talking about the right of . the Australian nation to be respected as a reliable supplier of primary and manufactured goods. In other words, Australians ought to be proud and able to hold their heads high to look to the future with a high degree of ex citement and expectation.
All members of the Labor Opposition stand condemned as enemies of Australia and mark themselves committed to lawlessness and the breakdown of our free and prosperous society if they do not vote with the Government on this motion.
Mr Hawke-I rise to order. I regard the remark that has just been made as grossly offensive. In terms of the ruling that was made earlier this day by the Speaker I suggest that the fact that a collec tive term has been used does not excuse the honourable member or enable him to avoid the conclusion that it ought to be withdrawn. It is something that is absolutely offensive and should be withdrawn immediately.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-On the point of order, the offence, if indeed an offence was committed, was very broadly based. The Chair seems to recall the proposition as being hypothetical in nature. There was not a direct as sertion or description of the Opposition but it al lowed for a certain contingency.
Mr Hawke-That is certainly not the way it was put.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair allows for a difference in interpretation. If it was the in tention of the honourable member for Petrie to be

scathing in that reflective manner I ask him to withdraw what he said.
Mr HODGES-Maybe it is a case of the truth hurting. But if the honourable member for Wills finds it offensive I will unqualifiedly withdraw. By voting with the Government, members of the Labor Party can demonstrate in clear and unequivical terms to militant unionists and those hellbent on causing hardship to decent honest Australians that they will not have a bar of dis ruptive and costly tactics. It is high time the Dolans, the Carmichaels, the Gallaghers, the Hamiltons and their ilk adopted a more reason able and responsible attitude and began working for Australia and Australians. For too long they have used rank and file members and the average Australian as pawns in their power game. If the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Hayden) and the much celebrated shadow Minister for Industrial Relations, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke)-the 'Mr Fixit'-and those behind them do not work towards the moderation of union activities and towards assisting with the minimis ation of industrial disputes, they will never gain the respect and support of the Australian elector ate. In other words, they will be on the Opposition benches for a long time.
The third part of my motion expresses concern at the unjustifiable effect of strikes and bans on the employment opportunities for young and old-their impact on inflation as well as the inter national reputation of Australia. Let me deal with these several points. In general terms Australia has an impressive record in managing the econ omy over the past five years . One must remember--
Mr Hawke-The worst unemployment in the West.
Mr HODGES-If the honourable member would just listen he might hear a few facts. One must remember we inherited inflation running rampant at 1 8 per cent. When the Whitlam Labor Government came to power in 1 972 inflation was running at about 4 per cent. When we took office the level of unemployment was in excess of 300,000, foreign investment was not being attracted to development projects and Australia was not viewed, because of the policies of the pre vious Labor Government, as a desirable and stable place in which to invest. Oil exploration had slumped to an alarmingly low level. Australia's economy was in bad shape. That was in 1 975 when the Fraser Government came to power. At the present time our inflation rate is a creditable 9.2 per cent while the average for

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

12 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 721

member countries of the Organisation for Econ omic Co-operation and Development is 1 2.3 per cent. Italy has an inflation rate of 2 1 . 3 per cent, New Zealand 1 6 . 1 per cent, the United Kingdom 1 5 per cent, France 1 3.6 per cent, the United States of America 1 2.4 per cent, Canada 1 1 .2 per cent, Japan 7. 1 per cent and Germany 5.5 per cent. Our containment of inflation is the envy of most other Western world countries. Although interest rates are too high at 1 4 per cent they com pare favourably with 2 1 per cent in the United States of America, 1 9 per cent in Canada, 1 5 per cent in the United Kingdom and 1 1 per cent in West Germany. Recently the Minister for Indus try and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) announced investment projects in the committed or final feasibility stages to a total value of $33 billion or some 306 proposals. This is double the level of

. . . we would currently be facing in Australia what might almost be described as an economic 'boom' of a kind we have nearly forgotten.
In his comments he noted that the reasonably swift expansion of the economy would continue, growth in business investment would be 1 5 per cent in real terms as a result of an improved cli mate for investment due to control of Govern ment spending, there would be a downturn in exports in 1 980-8 1 but that there was a good me dium term outlook for exports based on resources provided that Australia's new-found international competitiveness could be maintained. He noted growth in private consumption in excess of 3 per cent following strong employment growth and a rise in real disposable incomes and very strong growth in total employment--averaging 2.9 per cent-and the work participation rate.

project investment identified in a similar schedule in October 1 979-a doubling in less than two years. These development projects were for manufacturing plants, mining ventures, oil and gas wells and coal and iron ore projects. All of these investments will bring increased benefits and opportunities to all Australians.

I believe that we have established beyond all reasonble doubt that the economy is in good shape. Let me turn to the damaging effect our in dustrial unrest is having on that economy. Millions of man-hours are being lost annually be cause of irresponsible action by union leaders. Although damage is being done to employers the

In spite of unemployment in excess of 300,000, there has been considerable and steady growth in the employment area. In November 1 980, 1 57,900 more people had jobs than a year previously and 3 1 1 ,200 more than in November 1 978. Unem ployment in January 1 9 8 1 stood at 6.3 per cent compared with 6.7 per cent in January 1 980. Re tail sales are up. Exploration for oil and gas has increased. A rise of 4 per cent has been forecast by the OECD in our gross domestic product whilst the average for all countries for 1 98 1 is forecast at one per cent.

greatest damage is being sustained by the unionists-the workers-themselves. The loss in wages is astronomical. This, of course, means a lowering of the standards of living of people involved.
I now turn to Australia's international repu tation, which is extremely important to us. Union leaders may not be interested in our international reputation as a supplier of goods, be they primary products or manufactured goods. But I am sure that the average Australian is concerned. With 1 4.5 million people, a large land mass producing vast quantities of beef, wool, wheat and other pri

I now refer to two prominent Autralians who have spoken in quite glowing terms about the Australian economy. First of all I would like to quote the comments of Ross Gittins, the econ omics editor of the Sydney Morning Herald. In the National Times of 1 5 February he wrote:

mary products and, of course, the mining of billions of tonnes of natural resources, Australia is a great exporting nation. There is no way that Australia can use what it produces; we must export. Strikes, particularly prolonged ones affecting our exports, severely damage our repu tation as a reliable supplier on world markets. I

The economy is expanding quite strongly, with real incomes growing, consumer spending buoyant, and business invest ment booming. Employment is on the up and up and there are signs that unemployment is starting to drop a fraction. Interest rates seem to have peaked and inflation has dipped

call on all Australians to work towards the mini misation of industrial disputes in order that our international reputation as a supplier may be restored.

below double figures. The economic prospect for the early 1 980s is looking decidedly more encouraging than it did 1 2 or even 6 months ago.

I shall illustrate some of the trivial issues that cause industrial disputation. Union leaders call men and women out on strike because of rather

I turn to some comments by John Stone, Secretary trivial matters. If we look just at the lastcouple of

to the Treasury, who a few weeks ago addressed months, for instance in the engineering and metal

the Annual Agricultural Outlook Conference. He trades, we see an example at the Broken Hill Pty

said that if it were not for the drought and the Co. Ltd Port Waratah plant where 30 Amal

flatter world economy:

gamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union

722 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

members employed as tradesmen in the coke ovens department stopped work at 1 2. 30 p.m. over a disciplinary matter. Work was resumed at 4 p.m. on the same day.
Mr Holding-It might have been a very serious disciplinary matter.
Mr HODGES-If the honourable member listens he might see just how serious some of these matters are. Forty Federated Ironworkers Associ ation of Australia members employed as trades men assistants in the coke ovens department stopped work at 12.30 p.m. after an employee was spoken to in his tea-break. Work was resumed at 4 p.m. on the same day. On 23 February 40 FIA members employed as tradesmen assistants in the coke ovens department stopped work at 1 2.30 p.m. because a septic tank was emptied adjacent to their crib room during the tea-break. Work was resumed at 4 p.m. on the same day. Let me go a little further. Ten AMSWU members and 1 8 FIA members employed on No. 2 bloom mill mainten ance stopped work at 9. 1 5 a.m. over the removal of a danger tag. Work was resumed at 7.30 a.m. on 24 February.
Mr HawkeDon't they have any rights in re gard to safety?
Mr HODGES-They have lots of rights. Just listen to the content of the trivial issues on which the union leaders call them out. On 24 February this year 1 35 FIA members and 10 AMSWU members employed on No. 2 bloom mill mainten ance and production stopped work at 8 a.m. in protest at the use of apprentices during a previous stoppage. Work was resumed at 8 a.m. on 25 February. Again, on 24 February, 40 FIA members employed as tradesmen assistants in the coke ovens department stopped work at 1 2.30 p.m. in protest at their pay being docked for their entering the crib room early. Work was resumed at 4 p.m. on the same day. That is the story over and over again.
At Mount Newman Mining Co. Pty Ltd 1 0 Transport Workers Union o f Australia members held a stop work meeting between 8.30 a.m. and 9 a.m. on 5 January to discuss support for other sec tions of the TWU during possible strike action. A group of 1 8 Federated Engine Drivers ' and Firemen's Association of Australia members held' a stop work meeting between 7.45 p.m. and 8 . 1 5 p.m. o n 6 January to discuss a greaser's allegedly pressing a button to start a shovel. That is the sort of situation we are getting around the nation. It is time that the honourable member for Wills, as a fornier president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, did something in this place to dem onstrate that he is concerned now that he is in a

different position of power. Between 1 2 . 1 5 p.m. on 27 January and 7 a.m. on 29 January 1 9 AMSWU members stopped work over the company's refusal to pay overtime to six of its members for a shift they did not work on 1 7 January. So the story goes on and on. I mention those cases-there are many more of them here in my document-to illustrate how irresponsible are the unions, particularly the union leaders, in these matters.

Recently we had the case of the Qantas Air ways Ltd dispute. A dispute erupted which had national and, indeed, international significance. An agreement was reached with the stewards in that case. Yet the ACTU deliberately carried on the dispute. On the one hand the employer and the employees concerned decided on' an agree ment yet on the other hand the ACTU saw fit to continue that argument. I ask: Do Labor Party Opposition members condone these sorts of actions? If not, I suggest to them that they must vote with the Government on this motion. . ,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)ls the amendment seconded?

Mr Ruddock-I certainly second this very worthy motion and reserve my . right to speak later.

Mr HAWKE (Wills) ( l 2.33)-At this mo ment we are witnessing a dramatic illustration of the Government's perverse priorities in the area of employment and industrial relations. A notice of motion on the Notice Paper seeks to have this House censure the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) on the ground that it is alleged that he has lied to this House. We have now before us this concocted motion with which I will deal. We heard this morning about West minister traditions being important to this Government. But the priorities of this Govern ment are that instead of allowing debate in this House to clear the question once and for all as to whether we have a Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs who has lied to this House---

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I remind the honourable member for Wills that the word he used is regarded as unparliamentary.

Mr Holding-I unparliamentary

raise a point of in this sense.

'oTrdheer.

It is not censure

motion that is before the House specifically makes

the allegation that the Minister misrepresented

himself to the Parliament.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no cen

sure motion before the House. The Chair's ruling

applies.

"

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 723

Mr HAWKE-This Government has the option of moving a motion which will enable the name of the Minister to be cleared or not cleared and the allegations which have been made against him to be tested. The Government allows the alle gations to hang over its head. Instead, the Govern ment wants to deal with this motion which, as I will demonstrate, is simply a perverse attempt to proceed, as other people have, to create divisiveness within this community. Let us look at what the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) has said. First of all, I pick up the re marks of the honourable member in which he gave enormous plaudits to the record of the present Government in regard to economic man agement. He talked selectively about this statistic and that statistic. Let us look at the matter aggregatedly: We will go on to the comparisons that he wanted to make. He said that we are doing better than anywhere else--
Mr Ruddock-Let us look at a cross-section. Mr HAWKE-Do not shout like that. I know that the honourable member has his mind made up but he should listen to the facts and then exer cise his right of reply. Here are the facts. In Crisis in Abundance by Dr Peter Sheehan, the economic perspective, a recently published book, a compari son is made between Australia and all countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. It does not include the selective sort of quotations that are made by the honour able member for Petrie. Here is the definitive aggregated picture. This is what is shown: Firstly, looking at growth in the real gross domestic product-that is, what we are doing in terms of economic management to increase the output of goods and services-we see that in the period from 1 976 to 1 979, which was the latest period which could be covered by Dr Sheehan in his book and which covered the whole period of this Government-Mr Ruddock-Who is he? Mr HAWKE-I ask the honourable member to answer the facts afterwards and not make stupid interjections. Here are the facts. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask the honour able member for Wills to ignore the interjections. The honourable member on my right will remain silent. Mr HAWKE-Mr Deputy Speaker, if you would stop him that would provide the greatest help. What was the growth in output under this splendid economic management record of this Government to which the honourable member for Petrie has referred? The rate for Australia in the period from 1 976 to 1 979 was 2.8 per cent. That

was Australia's achievement under this great government of economic management, of which we are supposed to be proud. The rate of growth for all Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries was 4 per cent. Australia's rate under the Fraser Government in the period was 2.8 per cent. What was the situ ation in regard to inflation for the whole of this period? Australia had an inflation rate of 1 1 per cent and for all OECD countries it was 8.5 per cent. Right at the very outset the intellectual framework-if I may deign to use that phrase in respect of the honourable member for Petrie falls down. He asserted that the Government had a tremendous achievement when the facts show that the opposite is true.
Let us look in detail at the motion and let us proceed to demolish it. Before doing so let me make. a point in opening because there are those perverse people on the other side of the House who will seek to misrepresent the position of the Opposition. We on this side of the House do not say that the current industrial relations situation in this country is perfect. We do not condone all strikes. Many strikes which occur should not occur. As distinct from the honourable member, I am able to speak of concrete realities. We have tried to do something constructive about the situ ation instead of embarking upon this type of div isive exercise. Let us proceed further in the con sideration of the actual motion, having made our general point clear in opening about our view of the state of industrial relations in this country. Of course it can be improved and it ought to be improved. It will not be improved by the divisive attempt embarked upon by the honourable member for Petrie.
Let us look now in some detail at his motion. Before I go through it point by point I make the preliminary remark that the Opposition and I are not concerned to impugn the motives of many of the marchers who were involved and to whom the motion refers. In particular, as I made it clear publicly, I am not concerned to impugn the motives or the integrity of Tania Harris. What I was concerned to impugn and am concerned to impugn here is the integrity of the people who brought her here and organised her visit. The Murdoch Press brought her here not for the pur pose, I believe, of trying to help constructively in this country but to assist divisiveness. Having said that, let me go through point by point and fact by fact to refute what is contained in the motion. As the motion was presented by a backward member and expressed a backward point of view, let us take each point in reverse order. The third point was that the House:

724 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

expresses concern at the unjustifiable effect of strikes and bans on employment opportunities for young and old, their impact on inflation, as well as the international reputation of Australia.
The first point that needs to be made in the con text of the honourable member's reference to the impact of the industrial relations situation on the reputation of Australia is this : I plead with him to take some notice of his own Deputy Prime Minis ter (Mr Anthony) . The other night I referred to the statement of the Deputy Prime Minister and must do so again now in view of the fact that the honourable member has said that we should be concerned with the impact of industrial dispu tation on Australia's international reputation. What did the Deputy Prime Minister say in Tokyo on Australia Day regarding this matter? Let me remind the House of what he said.
Mr Hodges-He was trying to save grace. Mr HAWKE-I ask the honourable member to listen. Was he telling the truth? What is hap pening now is that the honourable member for Petrie is questioning whether the Deputy Prime M inister tells the truth. Mr Hodges-He was trying to cover up for some of your cohorts. Mr HAWKE-It is out. The honourable member has impugned the integrity of the Deputy Prime Minister because he said that the Minister was trying to cover up. Now we have it. Mr Hodges-I raise a point of order. I did not say what the honourable member for Wills said. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is claiming to have been misrepresented. He can seek the opportunity to make a personal explanation at the appropriate time. Mr Bourchier-Tell him to tell the truth when he is talking. Mr HAWKE-J ask the honourable member to withdraw that remark. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Bendigo will withdraw that. Mr Bourchier-I withdraw. Mr HAWKE-I remind the House of what the Deputy Prime Minister said. No wonder it has got under the skin of honourable members opposite. He stated:
There is one aspect about Australia that is sometimes raised with me and indeed was raised at last week's discussions. That is the industrial relations situation in Australia. I acknowledge that there are too many strikes in Australia but tne position in Australia is not as serious as the position in the US, Britain or a number of other large industrialised countries. Furthermore, in terms of man days lost, the impact of strikes in Australia is small compared with that of public holidays and normal hol idays of workers.

In terms of the nonsense that has corne from the

honourable member for Petrie about the impact

of strikes and the industrial relations Australia's international reputation, I

situation on ask honour

able members to note the remarks of the Deputy

Prime Minister of Australia in Tokyo on Australia

Day. He stated:

In summary, I believe--

That is, the Deputy Prime Minister-

that the industrial situation in Australia is given too much prominence by some people.

That is what the Deputy Prime Minister said in Tokyo. He pleaded in terms of what was good for Australia, that We should not have people under mining our international reputation and creating difficulties for us as a large trading nation. He re sponsibly said: 'If you have got the concern of Australia at heart and you are not concerned with cheap political point scoring, do not go on, do not emphasise, do not exaggerate about the level of industrial disputes in Australia'. He said that too many people had done so. What is the situation today after the Deputy Prime Minister has pleaded with concerned, patriotic and loyal Aus tralians not to downgrade their country? We have the honourable member for Petrie doing in this House precisely what the Deputy Prime Minister pleaded in TokY9 should not be done.

Having said that, let us proceed a little further and examine the facts. I presume that' these people are concerned with an independent, im partial assessment about the impact on the rate of inflation of strikes and wage increases which are brought about by strikes outside the aegis of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Com mision. Instead of looking at what the honourable member for Petrie had to say about the impact of these things on inflation, let us see what the independent umpire had to say. I refer, firstly, to the decision on 4 January of the Full Bench of the Commission in the national wage case. After lis tening to submissions from this Government as to the impact on inflation of wage increases brought about by strikes and other causes, the Full Bench analysed the factor which was responsible for inflation. I wish to read out what the umpire had to say. I suppose the answer from our friends on the other side of the House would be an abuse of the Arbitration Commission and an abuse of the umpire. On 4 January 1 980 the Full Bench, in its national wage case decision, stated:

In our decision of June 1 979, we referred to the risk of a re newed rise in the inflation rate. The movements in the June and September CPI have confirmed our fears, as the following
figures show . . .

The Full Bench cited various figures and went on:

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

1 2 March 181 REPRESENTATIVES 725

There is general agreement that wages are not to blame for this development which is explained by other factors-the Commonwealth Government's decision to raise the price of domestic oil to full import parity in one step; the continued rise in the world price of oil; and the sharp rise in world prices ofmeat" wool, metals and various raw materials.
So. what did the independent umpire say in re spect of the factor responsible for the increase in the rate of inflation? It said that wages were not responsible. The first element that the indepen dent umpire nominated as being responsible for the increase in inflation was the decision of the Commonwealth Government in regard to its oil parity pricing policy. That is what the indepen dent umpire said. He did not say that inflation was brought about by wages and the action of unions. He said that it was brought about by the action of this Government. What did the Commission say on page 1 6 0f the same judgment? After referring to statistics it said:
In the face of these statistics and bearing in mind that the resurgence of inflation has been caused not by wages but by in ternational factors which have brought prosperity to certain sectors of the Australian economy, we are not prepared to adopt the course proposed by the Commonwealth.
There we have it. The Government went before the independent arbitrator and gave its trumped-up version of what was responsible for inflation. It was told by the independent umpire: 'We do not accept what you are putting'. The Full Bench of the Arbitration Commission, the independent umpire, in the national wage case said: 'It is not your explanation which is right but other factors'. The first one nominated was a de cision of the Government itself. What did the Commission say six months later? I refer to its judgment on 1 4 July 1 980. At page 1 2, after refer ring to tables 3, 4 and 5, it stated:
We conclude from these tables that they endorse the val idity of the ACTU submission . . . that the non-wage factors remain the predomipant contributing factors in the continuing acceleration of inflation as measured by the CPI for the two quarters under review.
Those are the facts as they come from the umpire, that body which this Government through its Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) urges the trade unions to go to. He tells the trade. unions to go to the umpire and to rely on what the umpire says. This Government and this Prime Minister tell them to accept the word of the umpire. I have just quoted the words of the umpire. The Govern ment and the Prime Minister say that we should accept the umpire's word. I have read the words of the umpire. The umpire has said that it is not wages and strikes that are causing inflation. The umpire upon whom the Government tells us to rely said that the first factor causing inflation is a decision of this Government itself.

Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley) (1 2.47) -The Government is likewise quite happy to rely upon what the umpire has said but it is a matter of very great distress to me that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) should read out what the umpire said in 1 980 but not what the umpire said in 1 98 1 . Let us listen to what the umpire, the Full Bench of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, said in its last national wage case decision, that of 9 January 1 98 1 , about the very issue which we are sdaeibda: ting. in this House today. The Commission

The public have been greatly inconvenienced. Disruption of rail services in Victoria and New South Wales, strikes by tanker drivers, aircraft refuellers, radar technicians and, increasingly, the direct involvement of public servants at all levels of government in strikes, bans and limitations, have caused distress, lost time and hardship to the Australian com munity as a whole.

Let us listen to what else the umpire said on that occasion. Again" this is something that the honourable member for Wills would not read out. It said:

It is true that all disputes are ultimately resolved but the persistence of industrial action on such a wide scale, even be for!) recourse to tribunals, makes it clear that one of the main objectives of the present , system has been seriously compromised. The Commission has persevered with the sys tem despite this fact in the hope that the pressure ofstoppages and bans would significantly 4ecline. But it is clear now that this hope has not been fulfilled.

That is what the. umpire, the Arbitration Com

mission, said about the issue being debated in this

motion. It said firstly that the nation has been wracked by industrial disputation, secondly that

the workers have, suffered as a result, and thirdly

that the brought

very to its

skynseteesm' byofthwaatgdeisipnudteaxtaiotino.n

has

been

The 'other day I thought-this was confirmed

this morning aftt;i listening to the honourable

member ' fdr Wills-that George Orwell's

'newspeak' had arrived in Australia. We know

what 'newspeak' is. It is the process of giving a

word the meaning one wants it to have and not

the meaning that the word has. The word 'div

isive' keeps coming up. It was used three times

today by the honourable member for Wills. It has been used several times over the last week or so.

The allegation has been made that those who have

been protestirtg about strikes, bans and limitations

that have disrupted their own lives are divisive.

'Divisive' is the word that has been used. Those

people have been accused of taking divisive

action. that is.

TWhheapte. aonpleexwtrhaoorhdaivneartyakuesne

. of language part in these

marches are doing no more than responding in a

normal way to bring about some sort of stability in

society. They are protesting against the succession

726 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

of disruptions, strikes, limitations and bans that have plagued this country fot years, particularly over the last few months. These people want a normal life. They want to work and use public transport which they pay for themselves. They want to see their country prosper. They are proud of it. In response to their protests the accusation is made that they are divisive.

The public at large has seen the country wracked by industrial disputes. People have seen an increase in the number of disputes. They have seen workers and themselves inconvenienced. People have been unable to earn their own wages and meet their own commitments. They have seen pickets set up to stop people going about their lawful activities. They have seen people assaulted when they tried to cross those picket lines. They have been prevented from using public transport that they pay for themselves because the transport workers, whose' wages they also pay, have refused to work on occasions. In Melbourne people have even been prevented from dumping their rubbish during a garbage collectors' strike.

There is a reaction against this by the community-at long last, one might say. This is not just rhetoric. The statistics show that the number Df strikes and their effect Dn the com munity is increasing. Let us look briefly at the statistics fDr the September quarter. WDrkers in volved in strikes lDst mDre time Dn average during the September quarter than they did in any of the previous six quarters. The number Df wDrking days lost was 848,000 in that Dne quarter Df last year. The loss Df wages frDm disputes, nDt from all disputes but from those invDlving stDppages of I O man-days or mDre, in the September quarter was $42m. That is nDt $42m that the employers Dr the Government lost; it is what the wDrkers them selves lost. That is the agDny of the whole situ ation. It is the wDrker himself who suffers when he is virtually fDrced to gO. Dut on strike by a minDrity Df union leaders.

As I have said, at last there is some respDnse

from the public. Is it divisive for the public to re

spond as it has? Is it divisive to' demand the right

to' work? Of course it is nDt. Is it divisive to de

mand the right to use public transpDrt? Of course

it is not. Is it divisive to be free once and for all

from the black bans, closed shops, limitations,

picket lines and strikes? Of course it is not div

isive. But it is divisive for people such as the

hHoonuosueraabsleto.mwehmabtetrhefDAr rWbitirllastiDton

mislead the Commission

said and not read out its 1 9 8 1 decisiDn.

, . Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point Df order. I Dbject to. the propDsition that I

tmo.iswleitdhdthriaswH. Iouresea.dIDaustketxhaecthlyonthoeursaebclteiomn eomf btheer ArbitratiDn CDmmission's judgment which dealt with this matter. If I were to read the whole of the judgments of the Commission I would be here for hours. I did not mislead this House. I ask for a withdrawal.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I withdraw. I will take the matter a little further in terms Df fact. The hDnDurable member for Wills was prepared to. read out what the Arbitration CDmmissiDn said when it suited his argument. He did not read Dut to. the House what the Arbitration Commission said in its latest decision. That is a fact which he cannot ask me to withdraw and I will not with draw it. He did not read out that decision. The Ar bitration Commission made it plain that the sys tem of wage indexation, which is the only thing that the weaker, less organised worker can rely upon, has been brought to its knees. That has been done by the actions of some people in the Labor Party and of some people in the trade union movement. Those are facts. Who is being divisive-let us come back to that word-when a small group of builders labourers, in the middle of a working period, decide to stop a concrete pour so that the building cannot progress, and other building workers have to be stood down for the rest of the day and lose wages?
Who is being divisive when, in the middle of a working day, some railways union employees de cide to go on strike, although the work force has already come into the city, or is at Broadmeadows or some other industrial centre, cannot get home by any means other than public transport, and is left stranded and has either to walk home, take taxis or find some other means of getting there? Who is being divisive then? Who is being divisive when people protest about that sort of thuggery? Who is being divisive when the ordinary working man is sick and tired of being compromised by some of the extreme left wing union leaders and some of their handmaidens in the Labor Party and, indeed, in this Parliament?
Where does the responsibility for all of this lie? It lies with a small group of union 'leaders who do not care what happens to the building industry. Do honourable members think that Mr Gallagher cares whether the membership of his union goes down, as it has over the last few years? He could not care less. Do honourable members think that he cares what happens to the building industry or whether it attracts investment? Of course he does not. Do honourable members think that he cares whether or not buildings are put up? Of course he does not. If the building industry collapses and people will not irivest in it he and his cohorts will

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 727

happily go off to some new area of activity and carry on their own personal revolution there. They could not care less about the workers. All that they care about is their own revolution. They could not care less whether their own members go for weeks and weeks without wages as long as their action furthers the revolution. Who is being divisive when that course of action is adopted? The union leaders are being divisive.
The most unfortunate aspect of it all is that it is the worker who suffers from this sort of action. It is not the union leader or the employer. That, after all, IS the reason so many union members, so many ordinary workers, vote for this Govern ment. In fact, it could not be in office if hundreds of thousands of workers had not voted for it.

be called on straight away. In recent years, the practice has developed that the motion can be ad journed until the next sitting day. It is certainly out of accord with that principle for the Govern ment to do as it has done here. A Minister is facing a serious censure motion but the Government uses its numbers so that the censure motion is left on the Notice Paper and then again uses its numbers to bring on for debate this motion which can at very best be regarded only as a thoroughly trite, uninformed political exercise. Let me say at the outset that I for one will not vote for a motion that endorses the feelings of those Australians who were involved in recent marches.
Mr Dean-No, you will show where your true sympathies lie.

Mr Hawke-Who pays your fee to appear be fore the Arbitration Court?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member for Wills will re main silent.
Mr N. A. BROWN-They cannot take it, Mr Deputy Speaker. Listen to the squeals. I repeat it, it is the ordinaryworking man who suffers. That is why he, votes for us, supports the anti-strike movement and will support the Government on this issue. Unfortunately, the only thing that the ordinary wage earner can rely on is indexation, and that is the system which has been brought to its knees.
I have very great pleasure in supporting this motion. I give credit to the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) for proposing it because it gives honourable members an opportunity to en dorse the movement which has begun in Australia recently-a movement which, one might say, is not before its time-so that the Australian people can demonstrate that they are sick and tired of their country being held to ransom and ruined by a minority which has supporters in the Labor Party membership ofthis Parliament, and are pre pared now to demonstrate that hey have had enough.
Sitting suspended from 12.59 to 2.15 p.m.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (2.1 5) -The first thing I want to do is to condemn the Government for bringing on this motion having regard to the fact that there is a prior notice of want of confidence of this House in the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mt Viner) . You would understand, Mr Deputy Speaker, that the Westminster system, which we often hear talked about in this Parliament, requires as a mat ter of principle that, when a Minister is under notice of censure by way of a motion, such motion

Mr HOLDING-That is right. They certainly do not lie with people like Mr Ross May, a proclaimed fascist who was prominent in heading the march in Sydney. He made no secret about it. I have no hesitation at all in saying to the honour able gentleman that if he wants to associate him self with the feelings of Mr May, a proclaimed Australian fascist, he can do so, but he should not ask me, in terms of a motion drafted so loosely, to join him in that exercise.
Mr Dean-No, you just want to encourage ir responsible strikes; that is what you want to do.
Mr HOLDING-What I want to encourage in this House is some rational assessment of the nature of industrial disputation and the problems that confront this community in respect to it. Cer tainly the honourable member for Diamond Val ley (Mr N. A. Brow) was able to quote from a judgment which indicated that a particular strike had caused hardship and suffering. Of course he knows that, and he ought to, because when he is not in this Parliament, he is in the industrial tri bunals of this nation as an employers' advocate, on a very substantial fee, arguing the case for the employer. He then comes into this House and commands attention when he changes briefs, and states: 'Now I am talking on behalf of the poor be nighted worker who is misguided by his union leadership'. If one looks at the record of the honourable member for Diamond Valley and at the causes that he has advocated in the industrial courts of Australia and asks any section of the Australian working class who they would rather have to advise them-their properly elected union officials or the honourable member for Diamond Valley-I do not have any hesitation in saying that I know what advice unionists would choose.
Of course, equally, if this were not a political stunt, what an extraordinary thing it would be for this motion to be moved by the honourable

728 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) . Not even the honourable gentleman's closest friends, those who love him, would say that amongst his most con suming and passionate interests was any interest at all in industrial affairs. When I heard that the honourable gentleman was moving this motion, I thought perhaps he had an interest which has never been made apparent to this Parliament. I was so concerned about his interest that I went to the trouble of examining Hansard. This man who, as Deputy Whip, says he is concerned about in dustrial strikes, has not in the course of the last three years addressed a single question on any matter related to industrial conditions, problems or strikes.
r Hodges--What does that prove? r HOLDING--It indicates that amongst the honourable member's interests, he has never in cluded any great concern or worry about indus trial relations. J do not blame the honourable member for Petrie for that. He is a chemist. He is a purveyor of pills, lotions, perfumes and contra ceptives. I am not about to criticise him for that, but I am not prepared to regard him seriously when he now asserts in this House that he is filled with passion about industrial relations. Let us look at some of these questions. This man wants to lecture to the trade union movement--Iet me use his term--'On working for Australians and Australia'. What ringing tones--'Working for Australia and Australians'. The honourable member for Petrie--a chemist--on 6 November 1 979 indicated in this House his real interests when he put a question on notice which stated, inter alia:
Will the Government limit the supply ofprescriptions from
hospitals and use the facility of private pharmacies . . . On 1 9 February he wanted to know the total number of prescriptions for the contraceptive pill in each of the last five years. Maybe he was not getting his share of the scripts. This is the man who now comes into this House as a self appointed advocate on industrial affairs and urges members of this Parliament to share his sudden, overwhelming and consuming interest in indus trial relations. I am delighted to remind the honourable gentleman of the decisions and the statements made by those who have had the re sponsibility of dealing with our industrial re lations for years. Time after time the industrial commission and its spokesmen have pointed out that when one is looking at industrial disputation in Australia it is quite improper to attribute every industrial dispute to the trade union movement. The honourable member for Petrie has not in volved himself in any one of those questions in the past three years. A ustralian Industrial Relations,

a publication by Plowman, Deery and Fisher, sup ports the view of the Leader of the National Country Party (Mr Anthony).
Honourable members interjecting-r DEPUTY SPEAKER (r illar)- Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will resume his seat. I remind honourable members that interjections are out of order. The House will come to order. I call the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. r HOLDING-Australian Industrial Re lations, at page 57, states:
Most specialists agree, however, that the economic costs of strikes are greatly exaggerated.
The passage cites a table which points out that more working days are lost in Australia through absenteeism and industrial accidents-a matter that may be of some interest to the honourable member for Petrie because he might get a script or two if there is a substantial industrial accident than through industrial stoppages. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard table 2. 1 5 .
Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

A COMPARISON OF STRIKE AND OTHER COSTS, AUSTRALIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA, 1976

Australia

Unemployment

Absenteeism

$ WDL'

$ WDL

Strikes $ WDL

4, 199mb 60m 3,285m 57m 1 90m 38m

South Australia

Unemployment Absenteeism Ind. accidents Strikes

$ WDL

$ WDL

$ WDL

$ WDL

390m' 4.8m 3 1 0 5.2m 260mb 5.7m 0.8m O. l m

(a) WDL = working days lost. (b) Includes cost ofsocial welfare unemployment benefits
as well as estimated cost of lost production. (c) Includes cost of workmen's compensation as well as
estimated cost of lost production. For method of estimation see Appendix 2.4. Sources: ABS National Accounts, 1976; Labour Statistics, 1976; IndustrialAccidents. South Australia, 1975-76.
r HOLDING-I thank the House for that courtesy. The table points out that the most serious loss in working days in Australia is due not only to industrial accidents but also to unemploy ment which is the direct result of the policies pur sued by this Government. I want to make some more general comments about the nature of the trade union movement in Australia. Honourable gentlemen opposite never cease telling us that they believe in a free enterprise and a competitive

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

12 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 729

society. I put it to them that their concept of com Mr Hawke-In Poland.

petition cannot simply be limited to what goes on at two grocery shops at the corner of the street. Competition in Australian society at present in volves continuous competition by powerful cor porations which, in their dealings, operate as the most powerful economic group within the econ omy. We have retailers, manufacturers and pro

Mr HOLDING-That is the point I was going to make. Recently one exception has been estab lished. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , and 1 suppose the honourable member for Petrie who is always sniffing at the Prime Minister's heels--

fessional groupings. The honourable member for Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)

Diamond Valley is a member of such a pro Order! The honourable member for Melbourne

fessional grouping, as I am. For example, does Ports will withdraw that reflection.

anybody in Australia seriously believe that the scale of legal fees, medical fees, professional fees--
Mr John Brown-Pharmacists' fees.

Mr HOLDING-Right, he does not sniff at the heels of the Prime Minister--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will not trifle withthe Chair.

Mr HOLDING -And pharmacists' fees, are not ultimately determined by the pressure groups

He will withdraw the statement without qualification.

of those professional bodies? If we live in a com Mr HOLDING-I withdraw. Recently the

petitive society and we want to adhere to the re quirements of a competitive model, one of the fac tors which must be involved to achieve a freely

Prime Minister has become a strong advocate of trade union rights, but where does he advocate those rights should be held? It is in Poland. When

operating competitive society is the trade union Walesa and the infant trade union movement of movement. The trade union movement is created Poland are prepared to hold strikes we see

by the very competitiveness, the very nature, of honourable members on the other side of the this society. It represents those people at the House moving motions stating what a noble, what lower end of the socio-economic spectrum who a brave, what a courageous action that is. I sup

have only their trade unions to defend their living port Walesa and the efforts of the trade union standards and living rights. The trade union movement in Poland. But let me say this: I am not movement not only defends those rights but also it prepared, as is the honourable member on the

ultimately has been prepared to take on much broader struggles on issues which encompass such matters as civil liberties. I find it extraordinary that the honourable member for Petrie now wants us to support a demonstration. I support the right of people to demonstrate in the streets of Bris bane. That right does not exist because of any actions taken by the honourable member for Petrie; it had to be won by people like Senator Georges, members of the Queensland trade union movement and members of the labour movement being prepared to go to goal to establish that right

other side of the House, to demand rights for workers in Poland, a communist country, before I honour my first obligation, which is to fight for the rights of workers in Australia. That is the difference between the attitudes of honourable members on this side of the House and those of honourable members opposite. It is interesting that National Country Party members support this motion. That party was brought into being so that it could become a political representative of primary producers. There is no need for farmers to unionise like industrial workers. They have tra

to use the streets, for the purposes of demon ditionally used the political structure within strations. When the question of whether that right Australia and the National party to operate as a should exist was debated in this House the pressure group within conservative coalitions.

honourable member for Petrie said: 'You could not have demonstrations in the streets of Bris

Mr Fisher-- Hear, hear!

bane. They are unruly and they affect the traffic'. Mr HOLDING-The honourable member

Now he wants us to support the sentiments ex says: 'Hear, hear!' But that pressure while being

pressed in one such demonstration. We cannot used to benefit a farmer is not used to benefit the

have two sets of standards. As the honourable farm labourer. Whenever there is a suggestion of a

member for Wills (Mr Hawke) said, we on this drought honourable members opposite will side of the House concede that from time to time always argue that we must give the farmers con

strikes have been misjudged. But has there ever cessions, but they do not argue that similar con

been an occasion-I cannot remember one cessions should apply also to the retailers in the

when this Government has said that any merit at country towns or farm labourers. No group is

all can be found in a strike concerning workers' more politically ruthless in pursuing its interests

claims?

on behalf of a sectional group than is the National

730 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

Country Party. Its motivation in that respect i s no less worthy than is the motivation of the average trade union official. He fights for his membership; he fights to preserve their living standards. We on this side of the House make no apology for sup porting them in their efforts and for condemning this motion for being the puerile political motion it is.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (2.30) -1 thought that all members of this House would support this motion, yet we have just heard from the honour able member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) that he condemns it. I presume that he condemns, for example, that part of the motion which states that this House:

the industrial scene in so many westernised countries.
Just prior to Christmas 1 saw one of the most telling cartoons I have seen for a long time. Petty drew a picture of three wise men carrying a strike banner, picketing against the use of what he called an 'auto-Christmas machine' and going: 'Ho, ho, ho'. They were saying: 'We want a Noel pto ductivity bonus, we want retraining of wise men, we want a shepherd retirement plan, we want quarterly harking for the herald angels and we want a shorter silent night'. It would be funny if it were not such a tragic comment on the contem porary state of industrial relations in Australia.
Mr Dobie-That was by a socialist cartoonist.

. . . expresses concern at the unjustifiable effect ofstrikes and bans on employment opportunities for young and old, their impact on inflation, as well as the international repu tation ofAustralia.
I think it is most beneficial that today's proceed ings are being broadcast, as listeners will have been able to hear the past Leader of the Oppo sition in the Victorian Parliament condemning such a motion. He referred to the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) in terms which certainly did not dignify a member of this House. The motion we are debating endorses the action taken by those many Australians who feel very strongly about strikes and disputes in this country. Marches of this type are not a new phenomenon. I remind the House that back in World War I there was a tremendous groundswell of opinion con cerning strikes. People expressed distaste and dis gust at strikes at the Sydney wharves. At that time strikes threatened to deny our allies war pro visions. Both country and city people expressed their disgust and their concern by going to Sydney by the train load and camping at the Sydney Showground. As a result, the strikes were broken and the ships were loaded. That might be the mood of the people in this country at the moment.
We have seen the remarkable situation of a young woman in New Zealand who, on the spur of the moment, after a discussion with some friends and a quick call to a radio station, was able to mobilise thousands of people-at least 30,000 people-to march through the streets of Auckland to express their concern not only about strikes but also about the future of their country. They were expressing a deep seated frustration, a despair, a desperation, a resentment. - They were concerned for the future of their country because of the effects of industrial disputation and strikes. Their concern certainly is about unions, about dis putes, black bans, go-slows, work to rules-all the ludicrous trivialities which now are emerging in

Mr MacKENZIE-Of course; hardly a friend of honourable members on this side of the House. People are fed up to the back teeth with seeing people on strike who are being paid to go on strike, paid to go slow, paid to work to rules and paid to do half a job. They are fed up with seeing strikers being paid retrospectively by large cor porations and government, as we have seen re cently. They are fed up to the back teeth with see ing strikers denying public access, picketing, organising blockades, and flagrantly and inten tionally breaking the law. As we know, any other citizen would be arrested, charged and disciplined in a variety of ways if he or she were to undertake similar activities.
Mr Hawke-How hard did you work overseas on a parliamentary trip?
Mr MacKENZIE-I would ask the honour able member to note that 1 have worked in abat toirs and I have been a member of a union. People are denied the right to work, to speak, to express a contrary view. They are intimidated. Threats are made not only to unionists but also to their famil ies. At times, regrettably, we have seen physical violence as a result of strike action and the intimi dation associated with it. Recently every facet of life in this country has been affected by strike action-essential services such as our power in dustry, fire services, garbage services, telephone services, mail, transport services, fuel supply, and even the supply of basic foodstuffs such as milk.
It was not so long ago that one of the Sydney daily newspapers ran a column on the front page indicating where strikes were occurring that day or that week. I recall the reactions to those lists. People thought it was dreadful and a sad indict ment of Australia that newspapers had to run a daily list of strikes and industrial disputes. Since then we have been bombarded with editorial com ments, television programs and radio talkback programs as to how bad the situation is in

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 7 3 1

Australia. Yet we seem to shrug our shoulders with tired resignation because most people cannot see how they can do anything about it. How often have we heard people asking: 'Who is running the country'?
This Government and previous governments have not been strong enough in dealing with this problem. We have witnessed interminable nego tiations and slow, protracted processes of concili ation and arbitration. We have witnessed hesi tancy and people saying: 'Do not escalate this dispute. Do not provoke further trouble'. At times elected representatives have been virtually impo tent in their capacity to solve disputes, and, in many cases far too timid to intervene. It may be a reflection on past years and past leaders that many people say to me: 'Ben Chifley was pre pared to send the troops into the coal mines. What is the situation now? ' We have heard election promises that a strong stand will be taken, that essential services will be maintained and that secret ballots for unionists will provide one of the answers. Yet in many cases these intentions have not been fulfilled. I am yet to be convinced why a compulsory secret ballot for strike action cannot be implemented. In this electronic age all the punters in Australia can know within seconds through the Totalizator Agency Board, whether a horse has fallen at Randwick. With that sort of technological capacity in this age we should be able to take a nationwide vote on the shop floor as to whether or not to take strike action.
Mr Hawke-For shareholders too. Mr MacKENZIE-I wonder where have we come to? Why not indeed. Perhaps that is a valid point. It should apply to employers as well as employees. Mr Hawke-You will have an argument on your own side about that. Mr MacKENZIE-I may but I am not fearful of having an argument on my side. The honour able member for Wills (Mr Hawke) says that really it is not such a major problem if it is asses sed in terms of man-days lost. We have seen different types of strike action emerge in this country where key trades, key numbers of people or a small number of employees can hold to ran som a major industry Or a major operation such as a power station. It is not simply a matter of man days lost. For the first time in many years we now see demonstrations indicating that the public is dissatisfied. Had we followed the public opinion polls we would have known about that dissatis faction. Public opinion p olls consistently have shown that this is a very real concern of the aver age Australian. Such demonstrations are not an

aberration, a s was claimed b y the Deputy Premier of New South Wales. Certainly, they are not something untoward, as I believe the honourable member for Wills indicated. It is not solely a case of union bashing for the sake of union bashing but an expression of opinion by a very large pro portion of people. It certainly is not fascist. One could perhaps pick on one person in that category but I cannot imagine that there were 40,000 to 70,000 fascists marching down the streets of Auckland the other day.
It is not just the self-employed or the right wing reactionaries; it is the general community. Many of those people are unionists themselves; many of those people are families of unionists. They are sick and tired of being told by their union organ isers what to do, whether or not to go on strike, when to go to work, to pay a levy, to do this and that, to join up or to pay up or to shut up or to go without pay. In many cases they are being told so to do by a union organiser who has been paid from their own levies. On numerous occasions the rank and file members have gone against their union hi erarchy. This has occurred in meatworks, manu facturing plants and even in some schools. How seriously do the rank and file members take their directives when we witness such small turnouts as occurs in a number of strikes? How often do we see other unionists who believe they do not have a right to remove services from the community maintaining or attempting to maintain essential services? Those people who endeavoured to keep Qantas Airways Ltd operating during the recent dispute deserve our greatest commendation.
Who really wins and benefits from industrial disputes? The working public does not win. Do the families, pensioners, aged, poor and disadvan taged win when they are denied public transport services? Do the young and the unemployed win? Perhaps the unionists win in the short term but not in the longer term. Naturally the reaction of the employers, particularly the smaller ones, to excessive demands for wages, penalties, overtime and reduced working hours is to reduce staff. They cannot be blamed for so doing. Certainly it is not helping the young unemployed when people are being replaced with machines that do not strike.
I am not denying the right to withhold labour as a legitimate expression of a legitimate grievance, but I do not agree with the right to strike on issues that are not legitimate matters concerning the conditions of work of unionists. Strikes occur be cause it is alleged that it is too hot, too cold, too hard, or too far to go. The honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) mentioned a situation where a strike eventuated because a supervisor

732 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

reprimanded a unionist i n his teabreak. The trouble in this country is that everybody thinks that somebody else owes him a living. People are watching one another in case somebody gets a bit of advantage over somebody else. There is a tend ency to pull .down, denigrate and denounce those who work hard and, as a result of working hard, earn a reward.

Other honourable members have pointed out

the very serious consequences of industrial dispu

tation and strikes to the national economy. Any

body involved with exports would know that

Australia's reputation as a reliable, stable and pre

dictable supplier tarnished.

of

raw

mater;ials

is

fairly

was supporting. I would like to know just who was leading these marches which have taken place in the three cities.
The honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) said that 3,000 people marched in Mel bourne. That is not very representative of a popu lation of three million in the city of Melbourne. For the honourable member to move in this Par liament a motion of support for those 3,000 people--
Mr Hodges-There were 3,000 in Brisbane, if you were listening.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-There were some 4,000 in Brisbane. That also is a small number.

Mr Hawke-Your leader disputes that. He said the opposite in Tokyo.
Mr MacKENZIE'--H: e was referring to man days lost. I suggest to the honourable member for Wills, as I have before, that there are many broader issues than simple statistics of man-days lost. The alternatives for Australian exports are wide and varied throughout the world. Importing countries can obtain iron or other basic materials and in many cases, food and fibre from countries other than Australia. Australia has no sole fran chise for most of these commodities. It is in no position to become known as an unreliable and unpredictabe supplier of raw materials. The effects of industrial disputation and strikes on tourism becomes more and more devastating every day. Many people coe to this country and say that it is a magnificent country, but they are loath to return because of the hassles to which they have been subjected through strikes and disputes.
Again I ask: Where are we going? It seems that work is becoming a four letter dirty word. 1 con gratulate Miss Tania Harris of Auckland. She led the way in New Zealand. She asked people to stand up and be counted for their country. She said: 'Wake up, New Zealand'. 1 hope that some body starts saying: 'Wake up, Australia'.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (2.45)-1 rise to oppose the motion that is before the House which asks this Parliament to endorse the feelings of people who have marched in our capital cities in the last two or three days. I find it rather strange for astart that the Parliament should be asked to endorse a program when first of all we do not know who the people are who are-behind the marches. We dO not know what organisation this Parliament is beingasked to put its weight behind. Before 1 would be prepared to support a motion worded in the trms of the one before the House I would like to know exactly who this Parliament

Mr Hodges-There were 30,000 in Sydney. Mr CUNNINGHAM-If the honourable member looks through the records he will see that we have had marches much larger than that. No body on the other side of the House endorsed the marches that took place during the Vietnam war. Government supporters did not endorse the marches in those days. Why are they suddenly so interested in endorsing marches? It is because the marches are anti-union. We have to look at who organised these marches in Australia. Who initiated them? The idea to march came from New Zealand. It was not even initiated in Australia. The newspapers in Australia, mainly the Murdoch Press, got hold of what happened in New Zealand, decided to head line the march and to make it a viable proposition for Australians take up. Australia could not even find the impetus to get the thing going. What strikes have taken place in this country over the last 1 2 months to warrant such a march? Where are the strikes that prompted this sudden initiat ive? It is understandable that a march was held in New Zealand because industrial disputes were current at the time. The New Zealand people could have had reasons for doing what they did. 1 will not say anything against Tania Harris or the people in New Zealand because what they do is their business. However, J think that honourable members on the other side of the House are engaging in pure opportunism by bringing forward a motion which asks this Parliament to 'support marches in the capital cities when we do not even know who organised them. In fact, from what my friend the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) told the House last night one of the prominent nazis in this country led the march in Sydney. So r think one has to be very careful about whom one is sup porting in endorsing the type of motion which is before the Parliament.

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

12 March. 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 733

The honourable member for Petrie compared Australia with the rest of the world. He tried to say that because this country is so good unionists have no right to stand up when employers push them down. The honourable member compared conditions in Australia with those overseas. I have not heard in this debate honourable members on the other side of the House say one word against the employer who perhaps creates an industrial dispute. Are industrial disputes always the fault of the unions? Are the union leaders always at fault? Why is it that we do not hear occasionally from the other side of the House that perhaps we have bad managers in the country who could create a situation in which a genuine industrial dispute could take place?
The honourable member for Petrie quoted from a paper which claimed that people went on strike for safety reasons. To hear the honourable member speak one would reckon that ordinary working people were expected to front up to any job situation whether or not it was safe. An em ployee has every right to withdraw his labour if conditions are not right. If conditions are danger ous he has every right to take this action. This is particularly so if, as happens in many cases, the employer ignores the requests of the union to do something about those conditions. The honour able member just cannot take the point of view that the unions are always wrong.
The honourable member for Petrie also re ferred to confrontation. If ever in this Parliament we have seen tactics of confrontation it has been those pursued by this Government. At the present time there is a great deal of legislation on the books which promotes confrontation. It is de signed not to create harmony in the country but to create problems. We have seen this legislation used in the transport strike. However, it was not used in the transport blockade, when the high ways around Australia were blocked. We heard nothing from the Government side at that time about what should be done to solve one of the most disruptive strikes that we have ever had.
A few days ago we had a dispute in the Latrobe Valley which is the area I represent in this Parlia ment. It was once again mooted that the truckies have another blockade so that the problems that they had could be brought to the attention of the Government. They were quite entitled to do that. However, they decided then and there that they would be better off if they took their case directly to the Government. However, we do not hear anything from the other side of the House when the problems affecting the ordinary working people are caused by government action. Em ployers are quite capable of using direct action.

An employer.can take the direct action of adjust ing the price of his product at any time. He does not have to go to a tribunal to'ask whether he can do this. He jllst puts his price up. The only thing that may hold his price back is competition. As the honourable member .for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) said, a small grocer might be in compe tition with another grocer around the corner. In private enterprise this is about the only restraint tohneidrirepcrticaecstioann.dEmtapkleoydeirrsecatre' aecnttiiotnle.dHtoowpuetveurp, Government supporters take the view that the working man is not entitled to take direct action. Many a time this is the only way in which com mon sense can be brought to bear. Employees are entitled to take such action.
The fact that we should not support these marches is highlighted in an article in today's Age. This Parliament could not support the sort of thing to which the article refers. The article is headed: 'Screams, struggles and bitter division'. It states:
l 1 .50 am: yesterday: The City Square is a vortex of angry echoes, screaming people, hatred, raw patriotism, emotional ism, bad blood, and even matesh!p. It is an ugly atmosphere.
Is this what this House is being asked to endorse? Is this what members on the other side of the House want the Parliament to endorse? Are these the tactics they want employed to bring unity to this country? The article continues:
Fascists, communists, Come-on-Aussie, scabs, communist scabs, fascist scabs, Aussie do care, Prevent th death of our
country . . . The whole thing is a picture of total confusion. It is designed to divide this country. Yet . Govern ment supporters have the nerve to bring this issue into this Parliament and to ask the Parliament to endorse this type of march. The only newspaper group to come out strongly in favour of the march was the Murdoch Press. Right across the country last week newspaper after newspaper urged Aus tralians to take up the example - set by Tania Harris. The newspapers incited people to march. For what reason did they do this? It was done to create a division-to divide the country. If any proof is needed that this .is the reason behind this action, one has only to listen to speeches made by members on the other side of the House, because not once did We hear ' anything else but anti unionism. Not once did they mention any other cause of disputes in this country. The unions are always at fault.
Let us take it a little further and ask whether the unions are always at fault. Let me take as example possibly one of the longest disputes in this country. I have raised this matter in the House previously during the adjournment debate.

734 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Industrial Disruption: Street Marches

r refer to the dispute i n the Latrobe Valley of Vic toria. The Australian newspaper carried an article headed '$8m peace offering to strike workers'. If one reads that article one finds that the peace offering came from the Victorian Government, that it had nothing to do with the strikers. The situation in Latrobe Valley was that nine concrete batchers who were working excess ive overtime could not reach agreement with their employer in respect of putting on more labour. The job was too big and they wanted more assist ance. They had a meeting and informed the em ployer that they were going to work only a 40-hour week, which was within the law. They were sacked. As a result of that sacking 600 workers were stood down on the Thursday after Easter. They were sacked on the spot. Yet that is the sort of dispute that this newspaper depicts on its front page as a strike. Because of this publicity honourable members opposite come into the Par liament and say we have to march against strikes.
Let us get our facts right. Why did honourable members opposite not march against the disrup tion that was created in the Latrobe Valley dis pute, a dispute which had nothing to do with men going on strike. That disruption involved a delib erate attempt by the State Electricity Commission to slow down work on a construction site. Because of that the men in that dispute copped it. What do they get in the newspapers? What do they get from the other side of the House? 'Strike' is the only word the Government seems to know. l want to raise this point because it was raised by the honourable member for Petrie when he attacked the Builders Labourers Federation. It seems that Government members opposite have decided that those people in the Latrobe Valley will be a good target in their confrontation.
I put it to the honourable member for Petrie that when those men and their families in the Latrobe Valley had nothing to eat-I can guaran tee this; there is evidence to show it-70 families one week had to go into that union office and de pend on the B1.F members, good ordinary Aus tralian workers, to support them with food vouchers. I did not hear anything from the Government side about that-not one word. Government member's attacked the union move ment, attacked the BLF as some sort ofmonstrous creature that is the cause of all the problems in the country. Admittedly, there are times in disputes in the building industry when nasty things happen on both sides. There is no doubt about that. I am prepared to admit that. But when these people were in the right at that time, they have every right to have that put forward to the public. They should not have had headlines claiming that they

were on strike, as has been pushed by the Govern ment side.
The honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) mentioned a milk dispute. This pos sibily highlights the cynicism of those on the other side of the House and what goes on in strikes. I was vitally involved in that dispute. Two years ago in Victoria when we had a transport strike the milk supply industry was involved in spite of the fact that the unions had given an agreement that they would not pull milk suppliers out. The Vic torian Chamber of Manufacturers in its nego tiations on that dispute deliberately pulled a tactic on a Friday afternoon which created the situation in which, if the men had gone back to work, their whole claim would have been dmvn the drain. The men were still out of work over the weekend. On the Sunday morning-I will make this quite clear in the time that I have left-news reports stated that Mr Ivan Hodgson, the Federal Sec retary of the Transport Workers Union of Australia, could not be contacted. Being a plain old cow cocky at the time I rang him up to ask what was going on and why he could not be con tacted. On answering the phone he said: ' 1 am sit ting here waiting for someone to talk to me'. 1 went to the phone to ring the leader of the farmers' organisation and said: 'Look, this dispute is going to explode', because the members of the Country Party in the area at the time were organ ising meetings to try to stir up as much trouble as they could. Within three hours of that phone call the trucks were rolling again and milk was being picked up. But the members of the Government side who were involved in that dispute were quite happy to see it continue until the following Wed nesday. They want confrontation. They are des perate to get confrontation. I know of some tac tics that were used: I got a phone call asking me to pull the plug out of my milk vat, to let it flow down the drain for media purposes to make it look bad so the public could see the milk running down the drain. I still had plenty of room to store the milk. There was no reason whatever for the action so I refused. If the people involved had asked somebody on the other side of the House to do so they probably would have got the co-operation that they wanted and the problems caused would have been immense.
Mr Dobie--,What union are you in? Mr CUNNINGHAM-I am in the United Dairyfarmers of Victoria. Mr Dobie-Is that a union? Mr CUNNINGHAM-It was part of the Vic torian Farmers Union. That is what happened at that time. These are the sorts of tactics that are

Uranium

12 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 735

used to try to divide this country. It is time that the people were made aware that this sort of thing is intended only to divide. We cannot afford in this country to turn Australian against Australian. We have a great country to look after. We do not need the sort of approach we are getting from the other side of the House and particularly from the back benchers who proposed this motion here today. There has been no support from the front bench; it has all been from the back bench because the front benchers are not game to support this motion. They have allowed those on the back bench to support it because they are not game to do so. They are quite happy to accept the divisions that have been caused in the community.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
URANIUM
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The irresponsibility of the Government's uranium mining and export policies and the consequent catastrophic dangers for the national and international environment.
I call upon those members who approve of the proMpoosreedthdaisncuthsesionnumto'breirseafinmtheemirbperlascreesq. uired by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WEST ( Cunningham) ( 3 . 1 ) -The uranium debate coritinues-
Motion (by Mr Thomson) proposed:
That the business ofthe day be called on.
Opposition members--S-'--hame!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! Honourable members will resume their seats. The Minister has moved that the business of the day be called on.
' Mr West-Are you trying to stifle discussion on this matter? There were six speakers on some thing that the Government brought on to exacer bate divisions in this country but the Government does not have the guts to take on a great national issue.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The arrangement, of course, was that there was to be some debate on the motion which has just been dealt with. It was never intended that we would do away with the matter of public importance. I have been unable to con tact the Leader of the House who is at a Cabinet meeting. All we are asking for is understanding

and an intelligent sharing of the time. Time was set aside for the matter of public importance. I ask the Minister at the table seriously to consider the priorities from the point of view of an urgent mat ter relating to uranium and other issues. There was no arrangement that we would not proceed with the matter of public importance.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think the honourable gentleman has made his point.

Mr Lionel Bowen-We have been more than generous in the previousdiscussion. I ask the Min ister to give a concession on this basis.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The matter is not within the immediate province of the Chair. The Minister has heard the point as put by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

60

Noes

46

Majority

14

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, 1. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H, Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean, A. G. Dobie, 1. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. Giles. G.O'H. Groom, R. J. Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde, J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull, D. F. Killen, D . J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P, D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell, G. Cass, M, H, Charles, D. E. Cohen,B.

NOES

Jacobi, R. lenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R . J. Kent, L.
Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo

736 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Protection o/the Sea Legislation

NOES
Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R . J. L. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (TeUer) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

McMahon, Les Mildren, 1. B. Milton, P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, 1. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, 1. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West, S. J. Willis, R. Young, M.l.

PAIR

Moore, J.e.

Child, l.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE

Consideration resumed from 1 1 March of Senate's message.

Senate's message-

Mr Speaker, the Senate transmits to the House of Rep resentatives the following resolution which was agreed to by the Senate this day-

That for the remainder of the present period of sittings the Joint Committee on the New Parliament House and its Sub committee be granted leave to meet during sittings of either House of the Parliament. The Senate requests the concur rence of the House of Representatives in this resolution.

Mr SINCLAIR ( New England) (Minister for Communications) (3.8)-1 move:

That the House concurs in the resolution transmitted in message No. 48 of the Senate relating to the granting of leave to the Joint Committee on the New Parliament House and its Sub-committee to meet for the remainder of the present period of sittings during sittings of either House of the Parliament.

The reason for the motion is quite apparent. It

will mean that it is possible that the Joint Com

mittee on the New Parliament House, which is

faced with a fairly heavy program of review and

decision-making between now and the end of

May, can conclude its deliberations so that there

will be no undue delay in the completion of the

detailed design of the New Parliament House and

so that that detailed new design can be presented

to . Parliament in August to become the next

declared stage in accordance with the required

program of submission for approval to this Parlia

ment. The Committee, the Parliament House

Construction Authority and the architect, 1 am

told, are working to a tight schedule to enable

completion of the building in time for the bicen

tenary in 1 988. Demands on the Committee in the

next two or three months while the plan is

finalised are such that apparently it is not reason

able to maintain the schedule of meetings without

some taking The number

polfamceeedtuinrginsgensivtitsianggesdo, fI

the am

House. told, is

about one a week, mainly of the Sub-committee. I commend the motion to the chamber.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (CIVIL LIABILITY) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 1 1 March, on motion by Mr Hunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Before the debate is resumed on this Bill, I remind the House that it has been agreed that a general debate be allowed covering this Bill, the Protection of the Sea (Dis charge of Oil from Ships) Bill, the Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Bill, the Protec tion of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill, the Protec tion of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill and the navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill.
Mr LES JOHNSON ( Hughes) (3. 1 O) -Mr Deputy Speaker, as you have properly pointed out, the House is engaged in a debate of six Bills concerning the protection of the sea. These Bills are very complicated and very technical. They are oriented in general terms towards discouraging the pollution of the sea by oil. In this respect Australia has joined with other countries to give effect to international covenants and agreements. My colleague the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) , who led for the Oppo sition in this debate, outlined in very detailed terms the complicated and technical provisions of the legislation. I simply want to summarise the Bills to give some kind of total overall context to the remarks that I wish to make. The first Bill is the Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill. This Bill is involved with the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation known as IMCO. It is a specialised agency of the United Nations. Over 100 countries are associated with this organisation, All those countries base their laws on the provisions that are contained in the in ternational convention and thereby arrive at in ternational " standards. This has the effect that ships with over 2,000 tons of oil on board must maintain insurance certificates to cover liability for pollution; that is to say, there is a prescribed rate per ship's tonnage to provide protection for up to $7.8m. Other provisions mean that ships can be detained if they contravene the provisions of the Bill or fail to meet penalties. One provision sets out liability for pollution damage. The owner of the ship from which the oil escapes is regarded as the person who is liable.

Protection ofthe Sea Legislation

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 737

The Protection of the Sea (Powers of Inter vention) Bill, the second Bill, seeks to give effect to an international convention of 1 969. I notice that a Parliamentary Library summary states that the purpose of this Bill is to authorise the Govern ment tc/ take measures to protect the sea from oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships. Of course, that is a very brief synopsis of this complicated legislation. The international convention to which I refer involves intervention on the high seas in cases of oil pollution casualties. This Bill provides that while the 1 973 protocol to the convention is not universally operative its pro visions will operate from Australia.
The Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill, the third Bill, seeks to repeal existing legislation about the pollution of the sea by oil and to make new provisions to cover that situation. The major feature prohibits oil dis charges in an area which is less than 50 miles from the outer edge of the Great Barrier Reef. For the purpose of the legislation and I think possibly for the guidance of parliamentarians, if for no other purpose, a map has been prepared which indicates a mean shoreline drawn roughly from an area which is in the vicinity of Thursday Island down to Bundaberg. The proposal is that it will be an offence to discharge oil within an area 50 miles to the west of that mean shore line. I say in passing that already it has been indicated by the honour able member for Cunningham (Mr West), who is the shadow spokesman on the environment, that the Opposition feels that more should be done to protect the Barrier Reef than is intended by this legislation. Towards that end an amendment to the second reading of the Bill has been proposed. Since the debate has been resumed from last night I will read from the amendment. It states:
. . . while not denying the Bill a second reading the House urges the Minister and the Government, at the earliest

opportune time, to extend the distance within which oil may not be discharged to 200 nautical miles east of the line drawn
under Article I of Schedule 4 of the Bill. In other words the Opposition believes that in stead of a 50-mile protection area, 200 miles is more desirable.
I now refer to the Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill and the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill, the pro visions of which I will not take the time to enunci ate. I think it is important to mention that there has been and is in operation a National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil. This was set up in 1973. The Australian Treasury at that time provided $ 1 m to establish a fund and provide equipment for combating oil pollution in the seas. A levy was imposed to cover the costs of the scheme. This levy is imposed on all ships over 1 00 registered tonnes which are holding 1 0 tonnes or more of oil. The fee charged is not to exceed 4c per registered tonne per quarter. The current levy is 0.8c per quarter. The National Plan comes into operation after it has been determined that more than $500 worth of damage in terms of clean-up costs has been incurred. The seriousness of the problem caused by oil spills can be assessed from the following data: For the five years 1 975 to 1 979 inclusive, a total of approximately 1 80,000 litres of oil was spilled Australia-wide. The clean-up cost was in excess of $877,000. The amount recovered in fines was only $ 1 67,380. I have be fore me a table containing oil spill data which was supplied by the marine pollution section of the Department of Transport. It provides further information along the lines of that to which I have referred. I seek leave to have the table incorpor ated in Hansard.
Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

OIL SPILL DATA
Total for Australia; from State returns supplied by the Marine Pollution Section, Department ofTransport

Year

Amount oil (Htres) Fines ($)

Court Financial Clean-up

costs ($)

year costs ($)

1979 1 978 1977 1 976 1 975

1 7,060 52,090 46,170 1 5,747 48,775

1 3,700 34,430 40,255 20,330 58,665

2,355 4, 1 55 1 ,670 2,283 6,392

1979-80 1978-79 1 977-78 1 976-77 1 9 7 5-76

3 12,0 1 8 70,565 302,729 61,452 1 30,532

179,842 1 67,380

16,855

877,296

738 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Protection o/the Sea Legislation

Mr LES JOHNSON-I thank the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and the House. Very serious shortcomings in the National Plan have been and still are in evidence. It has particular re sponsibility for ensuring that pollution does . not remain unattended in estuaries and ports. From what I can ascertain, the most seriously affected port in the whole of Australia is Botany Bay. Members of the Maritime Services Board of New South Wales say that a staggering 309,400 litres of oil was spilled in Botany Bay in the last decade. There are, of course, clearly visible effects from that constant, repetitive disaster. A short time ago I provided information which came to me from the Maritime Services Board. That authority informed me that more than 68,000 gallons of oil has been spilled into Botany Bay over a 1 0-year period. That considerable volume of oil has caused direct and indirect damage to the seabed of the bay which is unlikely to be rectified, given the regularity of the spills.
In 1 979 alone there were 1 4 reported spills in Botany Bay, the most significant of which was from the World Encouragement, which spilled a mammoth 1 10 tonnes of oil. The clean-up cost associated with that epsiode was $210,000. Under Commonwealth and State arrangements the Commonwealth Government provides all funds in excess of $500 per incident to combat an oil spillage from a ship. The funds, as I have men tioned, come from a Federal levy on ships. Exist ing statutory defences have been used to preclude the imposition of fines of any magnitude on the owners of ships which have caused pollution. Since 1 970 a total of only $ 1 1 ,490 in fines has been collected. It seems increasingly unlikely that the maximum penalty of $50,000 will be imposed under the Pollution of the Sea by Oil Act 1 960 while the statutory defences under section 7 of that Act remain. In my view, there is a very clear need for additional measures to be introduced to protect the natural environment of Botany Bay. At present environmental studies of the water re sources of Botany Bay cost in excess of $600,000. Of course, the Maritime Services Board has to bear the expense.
A matter that gives me great concern is the damage to the Australian oyster industry resulting from this periodic spillage into Botany Bay. On 9 February last I received a communication from the Australian Oyster Farmers and Producers As sociation. The Association was very concerned about the oil spillage into the bay on 24 January 1 98 1 , Australia Day. Part ofits submission stated:
We are amazed that considering the experience which should have been gained from the oil spill in September 1 979,

involving the 'World Encouragement' Oil Tanker, that this re cent spill was allowed to cover half of Botany Bay and the whole of the southern bays and shores for 2 days and 2 nights with only a minimum attempt being made to control it.
There has been much Press coverage of these inci dents. In 1979 a similar crisis occurred. The Daily Telegraph carried a story headed 'Oyster beds wrecked: "Pay up for oil spill's damage" '. The article stated:
Botany Bay oyster farmers may seek more than $ 1 , 7 million in compensation following the massive oil spill from a tanker at Kurnell.
One spokesman said that 350,000 oyster sticks were affected, putting the potentia] loss at $ 1 .75m. This legislation will provide an avenue for compensation for people who suffer damages, including oyster farmers. Of course, that is a very good thing. Now that we are adopting the Inter national Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pol lution Damage, a guaranteed sum will be .avail able for the payment of damages to oyster farmers who can prove that damage was caused by an oil spill emanating from a ship; but, of course, that is much easier said than done. I took the precaution of ensuring that the oyster farmers registered their concern in respect of the Australia Day incident. If an oyster farmer claims 12 months or two years afterwards that his oyster crop has failed and that the failure could be associated with the oil spill on Australia Day 1 98 1 it would be very difficult to gather the evidence. How, could anyone tell whether an embryo oyster had been affected by a spill? Even in the present situation the oyster farmers might have a job in front of them to gain benefit from this legislation. At least it is a step in the right direction. We are ensuring that funds are available.
The shipping industry is to meet the cost of pr miums for the insurance cover. Oyster farmers suffering damage from an oil spill emanating from an off-shore activity, however, will not be covered by the convention and will be required to seek any legal redress availab,le from the polluter. The oil spill on Australia Day has been determined to have emanated from an on-shore activity. This convention does not apply in that instance. The national plan does not apply either. It seems that changes should be made to widen the activities of the national plan in the interests of maintaining the natural environment and ensuring that the loss caused by spills from whatever source will not fall on to the aggrieved party.
I am very interested in an account of these mat" ters that has been provided to me by the Deputy Premier of New South Wales, who is responsible for the activities of the Maritime Services Board of New South Wales. In furtherance of what I

Protection ofthe Sea Legislation

1 2 March 1 98 1 RPRESENTATIVES 739

have been speaking about, I asked the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) , who was previously at the table, whether he would approve of the inclusion in Hansardof a table provided by the Maritime Services Board indicating all the occasions when pollution was caused by the dis charge of oil from ships into Botany Bay and also of a covering letter provided to me by the Deputy Premier of New South Wales. The Minister said that he would approve ofthe incorporation. I now seek leave to have the documents incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The documents read asfollows
Mr L. Johnson, M.P., Member for Hughes, 2 Boyle Street, Sutherland, N.S.W. 2232
15 February 1980 Dear Mr Johnson,
I refer to yourletterdated 18 December 1979, wherein you seek certain information concerning oil spills and 'other re lated spills' which have occurred in Botany Bay since 1 960.
To deal firstly with discharges of products other than oil, the Maritime Services Board points out that the State Pol lution Control Commission has been the authority responsible for the control of such spillages from sources other than vessels since the promulgation, in 1972, of the Clean Waters Act, 1970. Prior to 1972, the Board had this responsibility in respect of discharges from both vessels and land-based sources in terms of the Navigable Waters (Anti-pollution) Regulations.
The Board does not have detailed information readily avail able in regard to spillages of products other than oil, but men tions the following as indicative of those which occurred in Botany Bay, or in waters leading into the Bay, prior to the promulgation ofthe Clean Waters Act:
(a) occasional spillages of paper pulp liquor from the premises ofAustralian Paper Manufacturers Ltd, Bot any. (On 1 1 June 1971, for example, the Company was fined $100 i n respect of two such breaches of the Navi gable Waters (Anti-pollution) Regulations); and
(b) discharges from Alexandra Canal into Cooks River, thence Botany Bay, of poor quality water. (For example, Robertson and Co. Pty Ltd was fined $45 for a breach of the Regulations on 24 April 1969 and Bernard Lawrence Pty Ltd was fined $50 for a breach on 26 November 1969.)
In relation to oil spillages, before answering the questions which you have raised, it may be of interest to you to know something of the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil and of the Maritime Services Board's legislation in this regard.
The Board points out that under the National Plan, which has been in operation since 1973, the Commonwealth Government provides all funds (in excess of $500 per inci dent) to combat an oil spill from a ship. These funds come from a Federal levy on all ships of over 100 registered tons, and which have more than 10 tonnes of oil on board, and are used to provide the necessary equipment and to cover the costs and expenses incurred in cleaning up oil discharged from vessels into the waterways of the States. The National Plan also combines the resources of the Commonwealth and State

Governments, and the oil industry, in co-ordinating man power and equipment around the Australian coastline to com bat oil pollution.
In cases where oil is discharged from a ship due to a negli gent act, both the owner and the master may be guilty of an ' offence under the Prevention of Oil Pollution of Navigable Waters Act, 1960 and are liable to a penalty of up to $50,000. Certain statutory defences are available to the defendant under Section 7 of the Act, one of these being where a leakage could not be avoidd or foreseen and where all reasonable steps were takenfor prompt discovery ofthe.leakage and after such discovery for stopping or reducing the escape of the oil or mixture (this was the case in the 'World Encouragement' spillage on 10 September iast).
With regard to the defence provisios in the Act, the Bard points out that its legislation, combined with corresponding laws of the Commonwealth and other States, gives local effect to the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil. This Convention imposed on sig natory nations the obligation of having control1ing legislation which, amongst other things, included these statutory defences.
Whilst the legislation does provides such defences for the defendant, it does, on the other hand, make specific provision for the recovery from the defendant of all costs of removing the oil and compensatory damages for loss or damage to prop erty as a result ofthe oil spillage. The Board indicates that this could involve a level of expenditure far greater than any fine which a Court would impose if a breach of the penal pro visions of the Act had been committed.
The Board is able to draw upon the National Plan fund to meet the costs it incurs in clean-up operations. Costs sub sequently recovered from the person causing the pollution en able the Board to re-imburse any National Plan funds which have been drawn. Costs of re-instating private property damaged by oil pollution may be recovered by the owner of the property in civil proceedings against the polluter.
To turn now to the specific matters which you raise, . the Board has rurnished the attached schedule containing, as far as possible, the required information. The Board points out that its records prior to those for the financial year 1976-77 do not contain the costing details which you have sought, and, in respect of the years 1960-67, only the source and date of the spills are available.
It will be noted from the schedule that in many cases the Board decided to take no legal action even though the party responsible was known. The Board points out that its Pros ecutions Committee, which includes the Board's Solicitor, gives consideration to the circumstances surrounding each in cident and recommends the commencement of legal proceed ings in all cases except where the spill was extremely small or where it is considered that the Court would rule that the de fence provisions of the abovementioned Act apply. In all cases where the source of the spill is known, action is taken to re cover the clean-up costs.
As far as studies into the effects of oil spills at Botany Bay are concerned, the Board has contributed $600,000 towards an environmental study of the water resources of Botany Bay. This study is being undertaken by the State Pollution Control Commission which itself, of course, has 'provided substantial funds. Oil pollution is amongst the matters taken into account by the study.
The study commenced in January 1 976 with experimental and research work being conducted in earnest during the period 1 977-1978. A series of some 27 technical reports have either been published or are in the process of being finalised for publication. A principal objective of the study is to rec ommend to the Government a comprehensive water resource management plan for the Bay and its tributaries.

740 REPRESENTATIVES 14 March 1 9 8 1

Protection ofthe Sea Legislation

Since the spillage from the 'Balder Borg' o n 6 August 1978, the Board itself has carried out a limited study on benthic, or bottom-dwelling, organisms to determine hydrocarbon levels in sediment and intertidal molluscs at Kurnell. The following conclusions have been drawn from the study:

(a) analyses of sediment and intertidal molluscs from the

AOR jetty area in the period August 1978 to February

1 979 indicated the presence of low concentrations of

hydrocarbon in the sediment and a reduction in hydro

carbon in the molluscs over this perio. (b) hydrocarbon levels in sediment in the jetty area were

equivalent to those in Port Hacking, an area not

influenced by oil spills. Thus it may be assumed that

past oil spills may sediment quality.

have

.

not .

affe' cted

the

AOR
.

jetty

(c) reduction in hydrocarbon level of intertidal m6lluscs

during this period supports the view that the oil spill of

6 August 1978 .had a detectable effect on the marine

environment, probably temporJl,ry in nature. (d) it is possible that the oil spill caused .a reduction in

bottom-dwelling organisms, but there.were insufficient

data to comment on this aspect.

Apartcfrom the foregoing, the Board informs me that biol ogists from several government authorities and universities are investigating, separately, different aspects of the impact of oil spillages. I understand that the results of these various in vestigations are to be used for a report to be compiled by the State Pollution Control Commission and, in this connection, as well as to provide you with information regarding spillages of materials other than oil since 1 972, I have forwarded a copy of your communication to my colleague, the Hon. D. P. Landa, LL.B., M.L.C., Minister for Planning and Environ ment, as the Minister responsible for the Commission. Mr Landa will no doubt himselfbe in touch with you.

I trust that the foregoing will be ofassistance to you.

". <. '

Yours faithfully, L. J. FERGUSON
Deputy Premier and
Minister for Public Works and Ports

MARITIME SERVICES BOARD OF NEW SOUTH WALES Oil Spillages, Botany Bay, 1960-1979

Clc;an-up

Company, etc.

Date Volume

Source

cost

Fine

responsible

--- --------- -

1 8 .4.60 23.8.60 30.9.60 2.9.60 1 6.9.60
1.5.61 2 1 .6.61 20.7.61 25.1 1.61 20. 1 2 . 6 1 2.4.62 1 3.2.62 27.8.62 7.9.62 3 . 1 2.62 25.6.63 29.1.64 1 6.2.64 7.5.64 14.5.64 2.1 1 .64 10.6.65 30.4.67 4.9.67 9.10.67 Discharge 18.1 1 .67 9 . 1 2.67 6 . 1 2.67
6.1 2.67 26.9.68 12.3.69 6.3.70 6.3.70 6.3.70 10.3.70 26.5.70 1 1.1.71

$ 'L. J. Thompson' 'Caltex Molanbique' 'Gervase Sleigh' 'Naus Crusader' 'Caltex Venice' 'Gervase Sleigh' 'Madeleine' 'Madeleine' 'World Industry' 'Vega' 'Hamilton Sleigh' 'L. J. Thompson' 'Gamsford' 'World Inspiration' 'World Independence' Boral Effluent Pipe 'Haukong' 'Madeleine' 'Pacific Trader' 'Hoegh Gandria' 'R. W. Millar' 'World Independence' Submarine Line Oil Slick 'Olympic Games' Laporte Chemic1s . Not known 'Jokinda' Apparatus
Land Ship Ship Ship Ship Ship Ship Ship Land

$

200
200 Dismissed 200 -Section 556A 40 40 200 1 00 Dismissed

Australian Oil Refining Pty Ltd (A.O.R.)' .
A.O.R.
K. Mikedis Captain Pedersen Captain Brandal Captain Jacobson Captain C. Mastellone Captain Xentes Amoco Aust. Ltd

Protection ofthe Sea Legislation

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 741

Date Volume

Source

25.1.71
26.3.71 1 .4.71
20.7.71 24.9.71 25.9.71
1 2. 1 .72 15.6.73
1 1.8.73 3 . 1 .74 1.3.74 3 1 . 1 0.74 5.1.75 9 . 1 .75 15.4.75 28.5.75

20/30 gaJlons Slick 100m diameter
150 gaJlons 70 gaJlons 100 gallons 80 gallons 2,000 gallons

Land
Ship Ship Land Land Ship
Ship Ship
Land Not known Ship Ship Ship Ship Ship Single Buoy Mooring

9.7.75 33,000 gallons

Single Buoy Mooring

16.7.75
2.8.75 12.8.75 19.8.75 1 0. 1 2.75 29.1.76 9.2.76 7.3.76 19.3.76 22.3.76
23.3.76
4.4.76 1 3.5.76 25.5.76

No oil reached surface
Light film
Jet fuel No estimate TaJlow 2 gallons 50 gallons 7 0 gallons No estimate
(minor) No estimate
(minor) 1 2 gallons 2 gallons 20 gaJlons

29.5.76
8.6.76 1 4.9.76 4.10.76 2. 1 1 .76 Q . 1 2.76

10 gallons No estimate 1 gaJlon
1 gallon 10 gallons 250 gallons

Underground pipeline
Not known Single Buoy Mooring Tanker 'Hanetia' Land Not known Cargo hose Pipeline Bunker line Crude line
Crude line
'Arthur Phillip' Submarine pipeline 'Nimbus' (Single Buoy
Mooring) Offshore 'Yena Gap' Ballast line Cargo line Submarine hose 'Robert Miller'

1 0. 1 2.76 23. 1 2.76
1 1. 1 .77 2 1 . 1 .77 2 3 . 1 .77 23. 1.77

1 gaJlonjet fuel 2 gallons No estimate 2 gallons No estimate
100 gal1ons

24.1.77 No estimate 3 1 . 1 .77 250 gallons

2 1 .2.77 26.2.77 27.2.77 13.6.77
5.7.77 1 1 .10.77 20. 1 1.77

2 gallons 15 gallons 15 gallons 1 2/20 gallons 2 gallons 25 gallons 25 gallons

'John Hunter' Not known Tanker 'EV I.T' Nol known Not known Submarine pipeline
Not known Submarine pipeline
Crude line 'Stolt Llandatf' 'Stolt Llandaff' Land Crude line 'Express' Not known

Clean-up cost $
1 9.00 paid by Total Aust. Ltd
10,21 8.00 paid by Tolal Aust. Ltd

Fine
$ Section 556A
50 Section 556A 50 100 50
100 Section 556A
No action
250 200 200 Withdrawn 200 No. action

Company, etc. responsible
Nightingale Silicates Pty Ltd
Captain Giacomich Captain I. McGowan A.O.R. A.O.R. Captain K.
Christoforos Captain H. Sukke Chief Officer
McIntosh A.O.R.
Captain D. Smith Captain R. Feary Captain W. de Simone Chief Officer C. Harris Captain A. Haukland

No Aclion

Total Australia Ltd

No action

A.O.R.

105 112
1 79 115 280 (paid by R.
W. Miller & Co. Pty Ltd) 144 71 26 60 120 265 (paid by A.O.R.) 104 12,700 (paid by A.O.R.)
136 162 218 43 27 1 27

No action No action No action
No action No action No action No action
No action
Section 556A No action 250
No action No action No action No action No action 800
No action No action No action No action No action No action
No action 1 ,500
No action 300 400 60 No action No action No action

A.O.R.
A.O.R. A.O.R. A.O.R. A.O.R.
A.O.R.
Captain P. Ferrar A.O.R. Captain I. Isasi
A.O.R. A.O.R. A.O.R. A.O.R. ChiefOfficer P. Gillett
Mr A. Joannis
A.O.R.
A.O.R.
A.O.R. Captain J. B. Hunter Captain J. B. Hunter A.O.R. A.O.R. Mr E. Turner

742 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 1 9 8 1

Protection o/the Sea Legislation

Date Volume

Source

Clean-up

cost

Fine

Company, etc. responsible

22. 1 1 .77 2.12.77 5.1.78 1 5 . 1 .78 2.2.78 20.2.78

2 gallons 2 gaUons 130 gallons 1 0 gallons 10 litres 80 litres

2 1 .2.78 l O Utres 2.3.78 No estimate

1 3.3.78 26.3.78 27.3.78 9.4.78 27.5.78
29.5.78 27.7.78
6.8.78

l O litres 10 litres No estimate 100 litres 100 litres 5 litres No estimate 2,500 gallons

7.8.78 7.9.78 2 1 . 9.78
9 . 1 0.78

1 litre 80 litres 2 litres No estimate

26.10.78 31 . 10.78 3.1 1 .78 1 6 . 1 1.78 4.12.78 12.12.78
6.1.79 7.1.79
1 .3.79 4.3.79 14.3.79 15.3.79 19.3.79 18.5.79 4.6.79

100 Htres Minor 10 litres 10 litres 20 litres 10 litres No estimate 90 litres Minor No estimate 25 litres 20 litres Minor Minor No estimate

9.8.79 Minor 10.9.79 1 l 0 tonnes

8.10.79 Minor

10. 1 1 .79 45 litres 24. 1 1 .79 2 litres

Not known Bleeder valve 'John Hunter' Pipeline Pipeline Pipeline
Crude Hne Not known
Not known Flushing line Not known 'Citta di Savona' 'Citta di Savona' Pipeline Not known 'Balder Borg'
'Balder Borg' 'Citta di Savona' Kurnell Wharf Not known (stormwater
channel) 'Texaco Plymouth' Not known Crude line 'Balder Borg' Not known Stormwater drain Not known 'Vega Sting Ray' 'Arthur Phillip' Cooling water 'British Unity' 'Citta di Savona' Overflow over retainer 'Robert Miller' Not known
Submarine pipeline 'World Encouragement'
'Botany Trust'
'Botany Triumph' 'Hoegh Ranger'

$ 112 92 590 16 49 51 (paid by
A.O.R.) 43 655 (paid by
Department of Transport under National Plan) 8 182 75 252 243
48 70,000
(Estimate not finalised) 62 57
1,914

$ No action No action 200 No action No action 200 100 No action
No action
400
No action
5,000
No action No action No action

14

N o action

68

No action

241

No action

154

1 00

128

No action

120 277 79 439 62 400
9 1 ,000
(Estimate)
2 10,000

400 No action No action No action 200 No action No action
No action No action

Cleaned by A.O.R.

No decision
No decision No decision

A.O.R. Captain F. Ross A.O.R. A.O.R. A.O.R. A.O.R.
A.O.R. Captain V. Monti A.O.R. Captain S.
Johannessen Captain A. Lund A.O.R.
A.O.R. Captain A. Lund
Captain Atkinson A.O.R. Captain di Fregosi A.O.R.
A.O.R. Owner ofvessel to pay
clean-up costs

- Section 556A of the Crimes Act is applied where the Magistrate considers the facts to be proven but decides to impose no penalty.
Other significant spills since (clean up cost ) : 30.l .80-ship, $7,500 1 5 . 1 .80-ship, $3,234 22.8.80-ship, $ 1 ,507
Forother spills costs not determined.
Note: Oil spill of 24. 1 . 8 1 was from onshore (Total) and National Plan does not operate. MWSDB is prosecuting. Estimated spill is 20-50 tonnes.

Protection o/the Sea Legis/ation

12 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 743

Mr LES JOHNSON-I thank the House. I strongly support the honourable member for Shortland in his call for a higher levy to finance the national plan which is responsible for the clean-up activity. I know that the States want an increase on the 0.8c per tonne levy which is only 20 per cent of the amount which it is permitted to charge. It is apparent that there is scope to in crease the levy. Increasing costs are associated with the provision of booms, skimmers and other containment and recovery equipment.
It is as plain as a pikestaff that if we are to deal effectively with the hundreds of spills around Australia every year we will need competent per sonnel with a high degree of mobility. For that reason more funds will be required. The States are involved with the major spills and receive assist ance for them where the expenditure involved is in excess of $500, but enormous costs are associated with the minor spills for which there is no Commonwealth supportive arrangement. In those instances the States have to seek recovery from the polluter and often the difficulties in volved hardly justify the effort. In most cases no legal action is taken. In many cases there is doubt as to who actually caused the pollution. The States are unable to establish the cause of the spill or the minor oil slick and so have to carry on with out the support of either the Commonwealth Government or the polluter in redressing the situ ation by bringing to bear the facilities associated with the national plan.
The legislation is good. We do not quibble with it. We feel that much more should be done to ensure that our Great Barrier Reef is protected. I believe that this has been an appropriate oppor tunity to remind the Minister for Transport, who is at the table, that the States are very anxious to make certain that arrangements associated with the national plan are overhauled and brought up to date so that the States can be better equipped to deal with the threat of pollution and the del eterious effect which accrues with too much fre quency around Australia's coastline.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (3.30)-in reply-Some points made by various honourable members require a response. Firstly, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) sought advice on the national plan, as has the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) . Secondly, the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) mentioned the need for com pulsory pilotage in the Great Barrier Reef. Thirdly, reference was made to the amendment proposed by the Opposition. Fourthly, the honourable member for Petrie mentioned the great work of the oil spills inquiry of the House of

Representatives Standing Committee on Environ ment and Conservation. The national plan, of course, was developed in consultation with the States, the Northern Territory and the industry as far back as 1 9 7 1 to deal with spills in areas outside the control of ports and the State marine authori ties and also to provide backup to those authorities.
There has been a close operational liaison which has continued between the industry, the Commonwealth and the States. An attempt has been made to improve continually the capability in developing the technological area of this im portant requirement. Consultations are taking place in the Marine and Ports Council of Australia to extend further the co-operation, in cluding a joint approach to a five-year program for equipment and training and also in-depth studies of the latest techniques of oil spill cleanup, oil containment and oil recovery. A levy increase which was mentioned by the honourable member for Shortland will be sought by regulation to fund the increased costs which will result from this program.
The national plan has demonstrated the benefits of a well-developed contingency plan for dealing with oil spills and, of course, is fully funded by a levy on the shipping industry. [f any honourable members want a briefing on how the plan works, both in-shore and off-shore in the high seas, I would be very pleased to make officers available to them to explain the way in which the plan would operate. In fact, I have asked my officers to prepare models for my own infor mation, and I must say that on paper the models look extremely good. There is a very close liaison between the Commonwealth and the State authorities. The Marine and Ports Council of Australia has devoted a considerable amount of attention to this problem.
The Government has been keeping the question of compulsory pilotage on the Great Barrier Reef under review. Of course, the embarkation of a pilot is not a guarantee of safe passage. The pilot's legal position is that of an adviser to the ship's master. International law affords freedom of navi gation to vessels on the high seas and, of course, parts of the Great Barrier Reef passage are cur rently high seas. The only known parallel is a pro posal which was made to the Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation to introduce compulsory pilotage at the entrance to the Baltic. This was not accepted by that organisation. In
stead, it accepted a ecommendation that vessels
employ a pilot. International reaction to the effect of this recommendation is being assessed before further consideration is given to Great Barrier

744 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Protection ofthe Sea Legislation

Reef pilotage. It is a n area that needs to be kept under constant and close review, and the Govern ment will do just that.
I would like to deal now with the amendment to the motion for the second reading. I am in gen eral sympathy with the purpose and the motives of the amendment. It is aimed at extending the prohibited ocean in relation to tankers from 50 miles to 200 miles. Australia was successful in ar guing for the baseline to start at the outer reef, which was a unique concession by the inter national community. An extension to 200 miles would be in contravention of the convention. Indeed, it would apply to Australian tankers only. Such an act could be interpreted as a move towards applying the extension unilaterally to foreign flag ships. At this time it would undoubt edly provoke a reaction from the international community. The oil discharge provisions of the Convention were designed by an independent United Nations group of experts and advisers from many United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Environment Program. I have discussed the matter with the honourable member for Shortland and have explained that whilst the Government is in sympathy with the Opposition's objective it would not be practical to try to im plement it at this stage. It is a course that could be followed in future negotiations. The Gqvernment does not wish to accept the amendment because it would only delay the passage of this legislation, which islong overdue.
Mr Charles Jones-That is not the intention. Mr HUNT-I realise that. Mr Charles Jones-It is a request to the Government that, at some time in the future, when the opportunity presents itself, it make a further approach, having in mind the extraordi nary circumstances presented by the Great Bar rier Reef. Mr HUNT-I consider the objective of the amendment to be worth while and I have ex pressed that view. But, from a procedural point of view, to accept it at this stage would delay the passage of legislation. We would not be able to achieve it immediately anyway. Mr Charles Jones-Are you prepared to do it, as a government? Mr HUNT-We would be prepared to pursue it in the course of negotiations. It is against the present provisions of the Convention but it would be a worthwhile objective for the Government to pursue; so we are not too far apart on that issue. The oil spills report by the House of Represen tatives Standing Committee on Environment and

Conservation was excellent and has not been ignored by the Government. I would like honour able members who participated in its preparation to understand that. Many of its recommendations have been implemented, and the package of legis lation before us is further evidence of that fact. 1 am sorry that in my second reading speech I did not mention the report. In order to expedite the business of the House an attempt is made to keep down the length of second reading speeches, and in this case six Bills were involved. I apologise to those honourable members who played such an important part in the Committee's work and were responsible for preparing what is a very good report.
Mr Humphreys-It is one of the great reports. Mr HUNT-It certainly is. Other recommen dations of the report are still being processed. We are working towards implementing later conven tions that will move closer to the aims expressed in the report. Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time. .
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (DISCHARGE OF OIL FROM SHIPS)
BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Hunt:
That the Bill be nowread a second time.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (3.38) -Having in mind my earlier remarks concerning clauses 9 and 1 0 of the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill, I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substitut ing the following words:
'while not denying the Bill a second reading the House urges the Minister and the Government, at the earliest opportune time, to extend the distance within which oil may not be discharged to 200 nautical miles east of the line drawn under Article 1 ofSchedule 4 ofthe Bill.'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER ( H o n . I a n Robinson)- I s the amendment seconded?
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (3.39)-1 second the amendment. I wish to say a few words in support of the amendment of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) , which seeks to move the line i n question 1 50 miles further east than is proposed in the Bill. Earlier, by way of interjection, I suggested to the Minister

Protection ofthe Sea Legislation

12 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 745

for Transport (Mr Hunt) that there was no strong disagreement between the Government and the Opposition on the matter. We do not want to hold up the legislation in any way. In the main, these are six good Bills. It is not worth even nit-picking about them because they involve the adoption of an international agreement which will improve the present position. However, we must take into consideration the fact that Australia's Great Bar rier Reef is a unique formation, one in which the world is interested and which we, as a parliament, have a very strong responsibility to protect. Although I do not wish to hold up the passage of the legislation in any way, I believe the Minister and his Department, when these matters are again raised with the Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation can at least raise the question, put forward the points of view that have been expressed by the honourable member for Cunningham and other speakers in this debate, and try to impress upon IMCO the need to extend the area to the 200 mile line.
The Opposition's spokesman, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris), has indicated that the Opposition will not divide on this matter. That alone is an indication of our wish to co operate with the Government on it. We accept the fact that nothing should be done to delay in any way the passage of these Bills but in doing so accept the assurances of the Minister on this mat ter. I am glad to see that he nods his head in agree ment with what I am saying, and indicates that he concurs with the principle and intent of the amendment. I realise that changes such as this cannot be effected overnight. One does not nego tiate new international agreements of this type in 24 hours. It could be several years before this mat ter is brought back before us again. When I say that I have in mind the speed with which inter national agreements are achieved. The Oppo sition merely asks the Government to get moving and to put into effect the principle underlying the amendment.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) ( 3.42)-The House is indebted to the honourable member for Newcastle (Mr Charles Jones) for the reasonable approach to these measures that he has adopted. There is obviously a consensus of the Parliament that we should negotiate to achieve the objectives which are outline in the amend ment proposed by the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West). It is a worthwhile aim and one that we, as Australians, should seek to achieve. I thank the Opposition very much for raising the matter.

Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (POWERS OF INTERVENTION) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Hunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (SHIPPING LEVY) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Hunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (SHIPPING LEVY COLLECTION) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Hunt:
That the Bill be nowread a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Amendment negatived. )

Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.

746 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Public Works Committee A mendment Bill

NAVIGATION (PROTECTION OF THE SEA) AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Hunt:
ThattheBillbe now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 5 March, on motion by Mr Newman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (3,48)-The Oppo sition does not oppose this Bill. It makes certain changes to the Public Works Committee Act which enable the Joint Statutory Committee on Public Works to undertake a wider range of in quiries. It also extends the ambit of the Com mittee to include statutory authorities with a group of exceptions which are set out in the Bill. I think it is probable that at least to some extent works of the National Capital Development Commission could have been brought within the ambit of the Public Works Committee for selec tive inquiry. The Commission carries out very substantial works in this area, and it would not be unreasonable for the Committee to examine such works. As an example, I point to the High Court building in Canberra which could well have done with some parliamentary scrutiny before it was built.
The Bill also extends the Committee's ambit to works overseas but not to overseas aid works. I am not sure of the wisdom of that, but given that the Committee's workload is extremely heavy, it is probable that it would not be able to carry out in quiries on aid works. I am concerned, however, that in respect of overseas constructions the legis lation limits scrutiny to being carried out within Australia and does not allow any form of site in spection, even on major projects. Recently there were at least two projects which were the subject of considerable controversy and extreme expense. I point to two embassies-Tokyo and Paris. In the case of the embassy in Paris, a considerable im provement could have been effected had a proper

scrutiny of the design and construction been car ried out 'and had a site inspection been properly conducted. There is more than one government involved, therefore I am not taking to task the present Government. Because of the design of that building, which was shown to a committee in Australia, it would have looked attractive else where but it looks most unattractive in its 10" cation, which is in an old world area near the Seine where it stands out like a sore thumb. The only less appropriate structure I can think of is a Japanese hotel a little further down the river.
On a more practical side, the building is not constructed to meet the problems which exist at the site. About two years ago the Seine flooded-as all rivers are prone to do-wipirig out all the facilities and services of the building, which include a significant amount of housing for em bassy staff. All of the electrical equipment, tele phones and other service facilities are in the base ment below the level of the river. This building cost hundreds of millions of dollars. One wonders whether a proper scrutiny of that project may have avoided what is a very serious technical fault in the design. I do not know what the cost of cor recting this problem would have been, but when members of this Parliament were in France on a parliamentary delegation the Australian embassy was virtually powerless. No lifts were working, it had virtually no lights and limited telephone ser vices. The people who lived there were without such basic facilities as light and electricity to cook with and water to use in the toilets because the electricallyoperated pumps were in the basement: The switchboards were out. In other words the faults in the design are considerable. The Public Works Committee of this Parliament has a very good record of picking up that type of design fault and the problems that go with inappropriate site considerations in designs.
Another area the Opposition is concerned about is the ability to exempt certain bodies-I am n o t saying whether they should be exempt-by regulation. I think it should be spelt out in the Act if organisations are to be exempt. The examples given in the notes are Trans Australia Airlines and Qantas Airways Ltd. I wonder whether that ability extends to Australia Post and Telecom Australia. I draw attention to some activities in that area. We had a debate on industrial disputation earlier today. Such disputes are not all caused by pigheadedness or whatever. S ome buildings, especially exchanges for Telecom, built over recent years are going to be, if they are not already, causes of industrial prob lems. They are built without any consideration of the effect that a lack of proper amenities can

Public Works Committee Amendment Bill

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 747

have, including natural light and other architec tural gimmicks which can have very serious psychological long term effects, not on those people who build the building and then put the plaque on the outside to say that it is open, but on those who in fact spend half their lives inside it.
Some of these buildings are extremely poorly designed from the point of view of obtaining work efficiency and employee satisfaction. They have the result of reducing the effectiveness of the em ployee purely because of bad design in a technical sense. Examination of that issue and the expertise which is gathered from the Public Works Com mittee's continual scrutiny of the matter could eliminate this problem and improve the efficiency of what technically may be a good building but one which cannot work if those inside ultimately reach a stage of total dissatisfaction. I think the most recent and the best example of a badly de signed building causing enormous problems both on the small and the large scale is the Redfern Mail Exchange. Quite obviously it was designed by an anarchist who wanted disruption at all costs, and he achieved it.
The Opposition does not oppose the Bill. M y colleague, the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) , who was a long term member of this Committee, will be passing some remarks and I expect that the Chairman of the Committee will also put his Committee's views on the Bill.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (3.55)-1 ap preciate the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Public Works yielding to me in this debate. I sup pose he would like to reply to this brief debate on the Public Works Committee Amendment Bill. The purpose of this Bill is to bring the works of statutory authorities, instrumentalities and other bodies, subject to specific exemptions, under the scrutiny of the Public Works Committee. Gener ally, that is a commendable idea. There are exemptions. Some of those can be justified and others cannot. For example, works of the North ern Territory Government are exempt, whereas work associated with the Northern Territory was the predominent work of the Public Works Committee.
We are told that the reason for the exemptions is that they are to be reviewed by the Public Accounts Committee, and that could be sufficient justification for the exemption. Tertiary edu cation institutions in the Australian Capital Terri tory are exempt because they are under the scru tiny of the Tertiary Education Commission. I am not sure that that is a fair substitution for a public works inquiry, but at least that is a reason that we

can understand. The National Capital Develop ment Commission is exempt. I fail to be enthusi astic about that exemption. 1 will say a few words about that in a moment. The Parliament House Construction Authority is exempt, and I have nothing to say about that.
This legislation is designed to strengthen the parliamentary committee system and particularly the Public Works Committee. This Committee is one of the few methods by which public scrutiny can be brought to bear in a very significant area of government activity. [ often wish the States would give their public works inquiries the same atten tion, show the same enthusiasm, and afford the same democratic opportunity for people and or ganisations to scrutinise the proposals. In fact, some States do not operate a comparable public works inquiry system at all. Our Federal Adminis tration, through the responsible Minister, ought to try to bring about more uniform attitudes in this connection. I fail to see why a $2m Common wealth project should be submitted for scrutiny and a $2m State project, which probably is fin anced by the Federal Government, is not submit ted for similar scrutiny.
Mr Humphreys-Like Queensland's Parlia ment House.
Mr LES JOHNSON-My colleague the honourable member for Griffith refers to Queensland's Parliament House. As I understand it there was no opportunity for interested organis ations or parliamentarians to have an effective say in that matter. Local government authorities, I know, especially welcome the opportunity to appear before Public Works committees to ensure that the amenities of the neighbourhood and so on are preserved.
Mr Barry Jones-The World Trade Centre in Melbourne is the most outrageous example.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER ( Hon. I a n Robinson)-Order! The honourable member for Hughes is making the speech.
Mr LES JOHNSON-N evertheless the suggestion of the honourable member for Lalor is helpful. I might be inspiring him to make a speech of his own. Many examples of that kind could be mentioned. The States ought to be giving these or ganisations, local government groups, environ mental groups and others the same opportunity as is extended t hrough this Commonwealth provision.
The most important feature of the Bill is that works undertaken by statutory authorities are to come under the purview of the Public Works Committee. It was an absurd situation that the

748 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Public Works Committee Amendment Bill

Government could circumvent a proper parlia mentary examination of a works project by setting up a statutory authority. The honourable member for Lalor could bring many such authorities to mind. Telecom Australia for example, engages in very large scale construction; Australia Post is another example. There are dozens of such authorities. It is very good that they finally will be subjected to this process. The process simply is: Parliamentarians representing both sides of the political spectrum and both Houses of Parliament meet periodically with the benefit of witnesses, expert advice and so on and make a recommen dation to Parliament as to whether works are justified.
Given that the forty-third general report of the Public Works Committee specifically calls for the extension of the powers of the Committee to en able it to inquire into much of the capital expendi ture of the Commonwealth Govern ment, especially that of the National Capital Develop ment Commission, the Minister for Administrat ive Services (Mr Newman) has a duty to explain in detail the reasons why the Government has rejected this recommendation. I can see no good reason why the National Capital Development Commission should not be included, as has been proposed by the Public Works Committee. Here we have a model developmental project taking place on a continuing basis; a planned city; the best endowed city in the whole of Australia so far as financial resources and technology are con cerned. We should be looking at this body very carefully. It should be under the influence and surveillance of parliamentarians because many other forms of development emulate the pattern set in the AustralianCapital Territory.
The Opposition does not endorse the failure of the Government to extend the scrutiny of the Committee to make random investigations of works costing less than $2m as and when deter mined by the Committee. Often there is a process whereby a very large scale project is extended in stages over a period. It is quite absurd to think it is important to investigate a project costing $2m or more, while on the other hand disregarding the importance of investigating a project just slightly under $2m, particularly if it is part of a staged program of development. The reasons given by the Government for refusing to do so are spurious to say the least. The Minister, in his second read ing speech, declared that this recommendation was rejected firstly, because the responsibilities of the Committee have already been considerably widened by the Bill; and, secondly, there would be severe administrative difficulties for Common wealth departments and authorities. I reject those

alibis out of hand. In short, the Government is not prepared to allow public scrutiny through the committee system of these areas of public expenditure.
I wish now to mention the staff of the Public Works Committee. If the important duties with which the Committee is to be endowed are to be effectively fulfilled the staff of the Public Works committee will have to be increased in proportion with its increased role and added responsibilities. I think I am right in asserting that at present the Committee is served by a skeleton staff comprised of a secretary, an assistant secretary and two other public servants. To me, that seems to be totally unreasonable. In 1 979 evidence taken at Com mittee inquiries amounted to over 5,000 pages of transcript. This equalled the total evidence taken during the record year 1 972 when 35 reports were tabled. This considerable work load was con tinued in 1 980. The Committee actually reported on 1 2 references, three of which were left over from 1 979, and over 3,400 pages of evidence were taken. This makes great inroads into the time of parliamentarians. They do this work at great sacrifice to the other responsibilities they have in their electorates. I remind the House that the United States Congressional Committee on Pub lic Works and Transportation has a staff of 48 not four. The Congressional Committee on Environ ment and Public Works has a staff of fifty-nine. It is obvious that the Government is treating the Committee indifferently. The valuable work of the Committee could be tremendously embellished if i t were t o have technicians and people with skills and expertise to advise it as to the type of interrogation and investigation in which it should indulge.
Finally, I wish to say a few words about the re jection of the Committee's findings. It is clear that the Committee's recommendations should not be dismissed by the Government without reason. I was once a party to, an initiator of, a rejection of a Public Works Committee reference which in volved a very large scale City of Sydney office block which was to house some 1 5,000 people. The Committee made certain that it gave the reasons for the recommendations it made In that case. But now we find that the Government can reject the findings of the Committee.
I think this occurred in respect of the $40m Australian Defence Force Academy. The Com mittee was prompted to state that in this case the Government's action 'appears to disregard the Parliament, and indeed appears to attack the basis of the parliamentary committee system'. How pious is the Government's rhetoric! It is continu ing a policy of strengthening the parliamentary

Public Works Committee Amendment Bill

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 749

system although it took such action on that occasion. The Government has yet to explain why it is prepared to spend $40m on the Academy against the recommendation of the Committee. I think the Public Works Committee Act should contain a provision to ensure that where the Government is inclined to reject recommen dations of the Committee full and adequate ex planation is given.
Mr Humphreys T - he Brisbane Airport also. Mr LES JOHNSON-My colleague the honourable member for Griffith reminds me that similar circumstances apply in respect of Brisbane Airport. The Committee could do many things. One project in my electorate-and many honourable members could mention similar instances involves the Holsworthy investigatory housing project on which $6,087,420 has been expended. The project involves 48 hectares of land and 500 servicedblocks of land. The Minister for Adminis trative Services, who is at the table, knows all about it. The project was started many years ago. Now a great curbed and guttered estate is lying idle. I fail to see why it is not being used. Projects of this kind could clearly be referred for investi gation. I think the Government should be inves tigated in this case to ascertain why such large scale wastage of public money is occurring at a time when people in the western region of Sydney in particular are looking for land at reasonable prices. Land prices have soared to some $30,000 for a quarter acre block. Yet, land is lying idle at Holsworthy. I would like to see the Public Works Committee turned loose on this project to find out what kind of incompetence is involved in the Min ister's administration which prevents him from making land available to the land-hungry people of the western suburbs of Sydney. 1 am glad the powers of the Committee are to be widened. They should be widened even more. I hope that the Government will pay a lot of attention to the valuable work being undertaken by one of the most practical, down-to-earth and hard-working committees ever to be established i n the Parliament. Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (4.9)-1 support the Bill before the House. r thank the honourable member for Hughes ( Mr Les Johnson) and the honourable member for Corio ( Mr Scholes) for their contributions. I know that the honourable member for Hughes had long and distinguished service on the Public Works Committee. This legislation which has been discussed with the Committee is a result of many years of pressure to try to get the Public Works Committee Act

changed. I think that action to get the Act amended commenced in 1 973. It has been a long and frustrating battle to get the amendments through. Most of the amendments satisfy the Pub lic Works Committee. However, there are some small exceptions. (Quorumjormed) . The amend ments widen very considerably the scope of works that the Public Works Committee can examine. The legislation applies particularly to a number of statutory authorities which will not be exempted by regulation. 1 point out to the honourable member for Corio that those regulations, when drafted, will come up for parliamentary scrutiny and there will be an opportunity for both Houses of this Parliament to pass judgement on them.
I acknowledge the comments of the honourable member for Corio in relation to Commonwealth works overseas. I appreciate that the request from the Committee that there be thorough scrutiny of overseas works was in fact prompted by the fact that the Paris Embassy was such a blunder in many ways. This Bill will allow the Public Works Committee to examine such works fairly fully. I know that we are limited to some extent by an in ability to make site investigations which are a nor mal part of our scrutiny arrangements, but I am sure that we can overcome this deficiency. (Quorum formed) . Before I was interrupted by the playfulness of the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) , who called for a quorum, I was referring to the charter of the Committee to look at overseas works. I drew attention to the limi tation imposed on the Committee to travel over seas to look at these works. I think that the ar rangement proposed by the legislation will be infinitely better than the present situation under which there is no scrutiny at all. I am sure the Committee can make arrangements to ensure that scrutiny is full and thorough. ] am also aware of the fact that if Committee hearings were held overseas legal problems would arise in relation to the attendance of witnesses and the like. There fore I think the Government has made a reason able compromise in this area. We accept the power given by the Bill, which we think is adequate.
The honourable member for Hughes referred to the Northern Territory and Norfolk Island. I think he may be to some extent confused about what is exempted from examination by the Com mittee. All the Bill does is clarify the fact that works by the Government of the Northern Terri tory and the Administration of Norfolk Island are exempt. This reinforces the fact that these authorities are independent of the Common wealth and can make their own decisions on this matter. Work in these areas which is strictly that

750 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Public Works Committee Amendment Bill

of the Commonwealth will still be under consider ation by our Committee. Matters such as defence works, airports and the like will still be considered by the Public Works Committee. We will not be considering Northern Territory school works and the like. The exemption from the Committee's examination of tertiary institutions in the Aus tralian Capital Territory, the Parliament House Construction Authority and inter-governmental bodies, I think, is reasonably correct and well justified.
Like some ofthe previous speakers I have reser vations about the exemption from examination of works undertaken by the National Capital Devel opment Commission. The works of the National Capital Development Commission which will not be scrutinised will be set out by regulations. Again, the comments I passed earlier apply to those works. The Minister for Administrative Ser vices (Mr Newman) in his second reading speech made the following point:
The National Capital Development Commission and the Parliament House Construction Authority are also exempted because of their specific legislation and functions.
I think the exemption from scrutiny of the National Capital Development Commission by the Public Works Committee during the rapid de velopment of Canberra was probably justified. I am not sure that that situation still applies.
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I draw your attention to the state ofthe House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- A quorum is not present. Ring the bells.
The bells being rungMr Donald Cameron-Mr Deputy Speaker, which Standing Order is it that prevents honour able members from calling quorums every three minutes? If there is no such Standing Order, why not? People who have had a bad night are just calling quorums out of bitterness. Mt DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. He knows that that is not a point oforder. Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, when the Government uses its numbers to gag a matter of public importance because it is frightened to de bate the matter, we will continue to protest by calling quorums. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Reid will also resume his seat.
(Quorumformed) . Mr BUNGEY-I was referring to the exemp tion from scrutiny of works of the National Capi tal Development Commission. I was pointing out

that during the period of rapid development in Canberra the exclusion of such works from parlia mentary scrutiny may have been justified. I think the circumstances are changing quite rapidly. A fair argument can be developed now that such works should be under parliamentary scrutiny. Let us not pretend that the National Capital De velopment Commission has not made mistakes in the past or is not likely to make mistakes in the future. We have only to look at a few things-to read the Auditor-General's report on the Cameron Offices, to look at the Be1connen town ship development or to look at all the vacant blocks of land on the outskirts of Canberra which have been developed and serviced, but which are unused and have been sitting there for many years-to appreciate some of the mistakes which have been made ,and which may well have been avoided by proper parliamentary scrutiny of the Commission's activities.
The Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory has been attempting to look at some of these aspects in its examination of the town plan ning provisions. The Committee is limited in its scrutiny because all it can do is approve the town plan. I have had discussions with the Minister for Administrative Services. I can quote an assurance from his second reading speech which I think is vitally important. The Minister in that speech stated:
The Government can assure the House and the Committee that should the Committee wish to examine any specific work of the NCDC, the Government would treat any request sym pathetically and would facilitate Committee investigation of any such work,
I feel that that is an important concession. I have also had informal discussions with the current Minister for the Capital Territory ( M r Hodgman) . I think h e agrees substantially with that point of view given by the Minister. I point out that the Public Works Committee allows input from the public in respect of decisions on construction works. At present this is denied to the people in Canberra although I notice that there are some efforts to develop consultative practices here. For instance, I suggest that ques tions such as the location of a motor racing track and all those sorts of things are matters that could quite aptly be referred to the Public Works Com mittee if the Government could not reach a satisfactory conclusion on them.
The honourable member for Hughes men tioned staffing of the Committee. He ma<ie a very valid point indeed. Over recent years the Com mittee has developed further the use of ass.essors. I think up to two years ago assessors had never been

Public Works Committee Amendment Bill

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 751

used. The assesors have expert knowledge in cer tain areas and are appointed under the provisions of section 26 of the Public Works Committee Act. This is one way in which the Committee has been able to a degree to obtain expert advice to sup plement its existing staff. I think it is interesting to note also that the report of the Remuneration Tri bunal recognised the heavy work load on the Chairman of the Public Works Committee and the Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts. It recommended that additional per sonal staff be provided to these two chairmen. The points made by the honourable member for Hughes in relation to staff are ones that will have to be looked at very closely indeed.
The only other point that I wish to raise is this: In the Minister's second reading speech there is also an assurance that works will not be phased in in such a way as to preclude examination by the Public Works Committee; in other words, works will not be proceeded with to such a stage that when they are referred to the Public Works Com mittee its examination is pre-empted by the amount of work that has been done on those works. (Quorum formed). Work is being precluded from parliamentary scrutiny by two procedures: Firstly, by works being developed over a period and having annual budgets of less than $2m. In that way the works either avoid par liamentary scrutiny altogether or, because they are developed to a certain stage by the time the Committee comes to examine them, in effect the Committee's examination is pre-empted. I note this assurance in the Minister's speech:
The Government expects work totalling over $2m to be subject to parliamentary scrutiny, and will do all it can to ensure that all works required to be examined by the Com mittee in accordance with the Public WQrks Committee Act will be so examined.
Let me say that very few examples in this area have come to the notice of the Committee in the last two years, although it was a fairly prevalent practice some years ago: Generally, I support the Bill. It widens the authority, work and references of the Public Works Cbmmittee Act. The Public Works Committee does a very worthwhile job. It is the only parliamentary committee that I am aware of that considers expenditure before the expenditure is actually committed. I am aware that the honourable member for Hughes pointed out the value of it and also the need for some States to establish similar committees. I point out that there are similar committees at least in Tasmania, Victoria and South Australia. It is pleasing to note that Papua New Guinea also has a Public Works Committee Act. I have no hesi tation in supporting the Bill.

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Viner) read a third time.
COMPLAINTS (AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE) BILL 1981
Consideration resumed from 10 March.
Second Reading Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employ ment and Youth Affairs) (4.27)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will apply to complaints in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police. Its purpose, to use the words of the Law Reform Commission in its first report on complaints against police, 'is to establish a system which per mits just and thorough investigation of complaints against police, while at the same time upholding morale and discipline in the difficult work police have to do'. Establishment of such a system is clearly one of the most effective ways of maintain ing and improving good relations between members of the public and a police force and the respect in which that force is generally held.
In large measure, the Bill implements the rec ommendations of the Law Reform Commission in its supplementary report on complaints against police furnished in April 1 978 at the request of Attorney-General Ellicott. Thus, the Bill recog nises the need identified by the Commission for certain elements of independence in the receipt, handling, investigation and determination of com plaints against police. The first of these elements is use of the Ombudsman as 'neutral territory' for the receipt of complaints, as the investigator of last resort and as public guardian to ensure that adequate and proper steps are taken in relation to complaints. The second element is establishment by statute of a special unit of the Police Force titled the 'Internal Investigation Division' with a specialised and independent function of inves tigating complaints by members of the public against police. Investigation of complants against police will normally be carried out by this unit. [ mention that a unit of this nature has already been established by the Commissioner by administrat ive action.The third element of independence will be the establishment of a police disciplinary tri bunal whose president will be a judge to hear charges against police officers of breaches of the disciplinary code. However, as recommended by the Commission, criminal charges against police

752 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

will continue to be dealt with in the ordinary

When the Tribunal is constituted by a judge,

criminal courts.

it will determine guilt and punishment.

The Bill lays down detailed procedures for the handling of complaints against police directed to ensuring that any complaint is thoroughly and effectively investigated. I now describe these procedures:
A complaint by a member of the public as to police conduct may be made to a police officer or to the Ombudsman; where made to a police officer, the Ombudsman must be notified.
Complaints as to practices and procedures of the force will ordinarily be investigated by the Ombudsman.

When the Tribunal is not constituted by a judge, it will determine guilt and refer the ques tion of punishment to the Commissioner.
In special circumstances the Tribunal may allow a complainant to appear and participate in proceedings before the Tribunal in such man ner as the Tribunal determines.
There will be an appeal to the Tribunal con stituted by a judge from a penalty imposed by the Commissioner.
The Attorney-General may appeal to the Tribunal from a decision of the Commissioner as to penalty on the grounds that the penalty

Other complaints as to the police, that is to imposed is inadequate.

say, complaints as to conduct of individual

There will be an appeal to the Federal Court

officers, will be investigated initially by the on a question of law, which is defined to include

Internal Investigation Division previously a question whether there is sufficient evidence

mentioned.

to justify a finding of fact.

If the Ombudsman is dissatisfied with the re

A police officer may be required by a person

port of the Investigation Division on a com proposing to complain to furnish his name and

plaint, he may ask for a further investigation by place of duty.

the Investigation Division or he may carry out an investigation by his own office.
In special circumstances, the Commissioner and the Ombudsman may agree that either the Ombudsman or a person outside the Investi gation Division should make the initial investi gation of a complaint; if the Ombudsman and the Commissioner cannot agree on this matter, the Minister shall decide.

Mr Deputy Speaker, on the details of the scheme, there were extensive consultations within Government and with the Ombudsman and the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police. The Law Reform Commission proposals were made before the establishment of the Australian Federal Police and this development in itself made necessary some variation of the Com mission's proposals. As a result of the consul

The Minister may, on his own initiative, tations, the Bill incorporates a number of vari

establish a special inquiry into any matter relat ations in detail from the Commission's

ing to the Force.

recommendations. These variations will, in the

After considering the report of the Investi Government's view, improve the general effec

gation Division or the report of his own investi tiveness of the proposed system while in no way

gation, the Ombudsman may recommend that detracting from the objectives identified by the

criminal or disciplinary charges should be Commission. Dealing with the first of these vari

brought against a member; if the Commissioner ations, the Commission contemplated that the

does not agree with the recommendation, the Ombudsman would retain his existing jurisdiction

matter shall be referred to the Attorney under the Ombudsman Act 1 976 in relation to the

General, who shall decide what charges, if any, police force in parallel with the new jurisdiction

should be brought.

to bc given to him under the proposed legislation.

Criminal charges against a police officer will be brought in the ordinary courts; disciplinary charges originating from a complaint from a member of the public will be dealt with by the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal to be es tablished under the legislation; other disciplin ary charges will also be heard by the Tribunal if the member so requests or the Commissioner so determines.
The Tribunal will be constituted by a judge of the Federal Court or Supreme Court of a

The Government, however, concluded that such an arrangement could produce uncertainty and confusion and it would be preferable for the rel evant provisions of the Ombudsman Act to be in corporated in the new legislation so that the Ombudsman's role in relation to complaints against police will be dealt with in the one Act. However, whilst the variations should produce greater convenience and certainty, the end result will be substantially the same as thai intended by the Commission.

State or Territory or magistrate or legal The second variation concerns the Com

practitioner.

mission's recommendation that the Ombudsman

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 753

would be empowered to conduct his own investi being remitted to the Commissioner for determi

gations in certain limited cases. As I have nation. However, when the Tribunal is consti

explained above, the Bill will empower the tuted by a judge, the Bill provides that it should

Ombudsman in all cases to conduct his own inves determine both guilt and penalty. Further, the

tigation if dissatisfied with the Investigation Div Attorney-General may appeal to the Disciplinary

ision's report. Further, the Ombudsman will con Tribunal if he is of the opinion that the punish

duct the initial investigation when the complaint ment imposed by the Commissioner is inadequate.

is as to the practices and procedures of the force. Additionally, in special cases, when the Ombuds man and Commissioner so agree or the Minister determines, the Ombudsman may conduct the in itial investigation. Thus, in total result, the Ombudsman will be given an effective and meaningful role in investigation of complaints against police. Pending the introduction of legis

Finally, the Commission recommended pro vision of a right of appeal to the Federal Court on questions of law from decisions of the Disciplin ary Tribunal. The Bill makes it clear that his right of appeal extends to whether there is sufficient evidence to justify a finding of fact by the Tribunal.

lation, the Commissioner and the Ombudsman The Bill should be regarded as in no way a have, by administrative steps, put into effect ar reflection on the Australian Federal Police or its

rangements similar in effect to these provisions of members who with the fewest possible exceptions,

the Bill and I understand that these arrangements perform their difficult tasks with honesty, zeal

are operating effectively and satisfactorily.

and devotion to duty. However, for the reasons I

The next variation concerns the Commission's recommendation that 'in extreme circumstances' the Ombudsman should be in a position to ensure that a charge is laid against a police officer by making a formal recommendation to such effect. On consideration of this proposal, the Govern ment concluded that a more effective arrange ment would be to provide that, following an ap propriate investigation, the Ombudsman may recommend to the Commissioner what charges, if

have explained, it is necessary that an effective and just system of investigating complaints by members of the public against police officers should be established. This Bill will establish such a system and the minor variations from the Com mission's proposals that I have indicated in no way detract from the great credit due to the Com mission for its evolution of the basic concept on which this Bill is constructed. I commend the Bill to the House.

any, should be laid against a police officer and Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.

confer with the Commissioner on this matter. Failing agreement between the Ombudsman and the Commissioner, the matter will be referred to

AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE AMENDMENT BILL 1981

the Attorney-General who will decide what Consideration resumed from 10 March.

action, if any, should be taken in relation to charg ing the police officer.

Second Reading

A further variation concerns the Commission's recommendations that provision should be made

meMntranVdINYEouRth(AStfifraliirnsg)(4M.3i9n)i-st-e-1':"'rmfoovreE: mploy

for conciliation by the Ombudsman not only by That the Bill be now read a second time.

the Commissioner. The Government considered that it would be appropriate to provide for con ciliation by the Commissioner as well as the Ombudsman, subject to appropriate safeguards such as notification to the Ombudsman who may require the complaint to be investigated in spite of the Commissioner's conciliation action.

This Bill complements the Complaints (Aus tralian Federal Police) Bill 1 98 1 in that it im plements further important recommendations of the Law Reform Commission in its supplemen tary report on complaints against police. The first was a recommendation for removal of the long standing anomaly in relation to the vicarious re

In dealing with the jurisdiction of the proposed sponsibility of the Commonwealth for the acts of

Disciplinary Tribunal, the Commission recom police officers. For many years the Common

mended that the Tribunal should in all cases de wealth has been vicariously responsible for the

termine the penalty as well as the guilt of the de wrongful acts of its officers, servants or agents but,

fen d a n t . Recognising the n e e d for t h e except in the circumstances covered by the Com

Commissioner t o be, and t o b e seen t o be, the monwealth Motor Vehicles (Liability) Act 1 959,

source of discipline within the force, the Govern the Commonwealth has not been so responsible

ment concluded, as I have explained before, that for the acts of police officers in the course of their

the Tribunal, when constituted by other than a duties. There is no sufficient reason why a police

judge should determine only guilt, the penalty officer should, in this regard, be placed in a

754 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

different position t o that o f any other officer of the Commonwealth. Accordingly, the Govern ment was glad to accept the Commission's recommendation in this regard and the Bill will make the Commonwealth liable for civil wrongs committed by police officers in the performance of their duties. The result will be more satisfac tory, from the point of view not only of the citizen claiming damages but also the police officer in question.
The Law Reform Commission pointed out that absence of identification numbers in the dress of uniformed police reduced the capacity of a com plainant to make a meaningful complaint. To remedy this, the Commission recommended imposition of a requirement for members of cer tain ranks of the police force to wear identifica tion numbers, The Bill implements this recommendation. The Bill thus plays an import ant part in the general implementation of the recommendations of the Commission and I com mend it to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
COMPLAINTS (AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE) BILL 1981
Debate resumed. Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employ ment and Youth Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Australian Federal Police Amendment Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conlusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.42 ) -The Oppo sition is not opposing either of these Bills. Sub stantive remarks on the Bills were made by my colleague Senator Gietzelt in another place, who has responsibility for the Opposition in this area. The Opposition has one or two concerns about the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Amendment Bill which it hopes will not develop ata later stage to be of a serious nature. Neverthe less, it is important that where complaints against the police are made the mechanism by which those complaints are dealt with is fair to both the complainant and the police officers concerned. It is of absolute importance that there be no cloud of suspicion over the means by which complaints are heard, or the determination that they be heard,

when the ultimate clearing of the police officers concerned occurs, which in most cases it will.
One of the provisions in the Bill which is different from the report of the Law Reform Commission is the provision that when there is a dispute between the Ombudsman and the Com missioner as to whether charges should be laid the Attorney-General shall determine whether such charges should be laid. The Law Reform Com mission indicated that in such circumstances the Ombudsman could in fact lay charges which would then be heard by the disciplinary tribunal. I personally think that is a better situation. A police officer may have charges laid against him or her which have sufficient substance for the Ombuds man to consider that they be proceeded with. They may not be proceeded with because the Commissioner, who is after all a member of the police force and, I would expect, has loyalties to his force, and the Attorney-General of the day de termine that such charges will not be proceeded with.
I will give a hypothetical case because this could be very important to the police officer con cerned. It certainly could be a matter of consider able denigration of the police force and could damage it. I use as an example a demonstration march which occurred a few years ago when Air Vice Marshall Ky came to Australia. To take the other side I could refer to the Yugoslav Prime Minister.
An incident involving a police officer could occur and it could result in complaints being made against that police officer. The Commonwealth Ombudsman in his investigation might come to the conclusion that there is sufficient substance in the complaint for the complaint to succeed but the Commissioner of Police, who probably is more practically associated with police operations, might consider that the complaint is not sufficient to warrant its going before the tribunal-he might disagree with the complaint's proceeding. I do not question any Attorney-General, past or present, but I suggest that an Attorney-General who as a politician was vitally involved in certain situations might find that, even though his decision is cor rect, that decision is not necessarily acceptable. I name two such situations: The now Mr Justice Murphy would have been very much under suspicion from right wing Yugoslav groups con cerning the Yugoslav Prime Minister, and the late Senator Greenwood would have been similarly thought of by groups opposed to the Vietnam War.
The final position of a police officer is that, whilst no charges have been laid, for the rest of his

Complaints (Australian FederalPolice) Bill

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 755

career, or for as long as memories exist, he has a slight against him because charges which were thought by the Ombudsman to be sufficient to prevail were not proceeded with. People who are politically involved or who, considering them selves to have been disadvantaged, were respon sible for laying the charges will consider that the charges were not proceeded with because of a pol itical rather than a judicial decision. I think it would be far better if the charges were to go straight to the tribunal. U nder those circum stances it would be highly unlikely that the officer concerned would suffer or be found guilty. But if, in fact, it was found that he was guilty, justice not only would be done but also would be seen to be done. It is a problem because r believe it is essen tial that both police officers and the public are satisfied that the means by which complaints are dealt with enable a correct and proper determi nation to be made.
[t is probably a weakness in the Act that the complainant has no place in the proceedings other than under special circumstances. It could be felt that the exclusion of the complainant removed or downgraded the status of a complaint. Too often police officers are the victim, especially with members of the legal profession. With due respect to the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) , certain members of the criminal Bar make a practice of accusing police officers of mal practice. It is absolutely necessary in all these types of situations that police officers have avail able to them a means by which charges can be laid, and they are then either convicted or cleared, so that no suspicion remains. That is absolutely necessary for not only the officers involved but also other members of the force because there is a spin-off in all such situations. It is essential that the machinery works.
The other Bill in this pair of Bills requires police officers to wear identification. One of the great controversies of recent years has been that in cer tain circumstances identifications have been re moved by officers in order to prevent complaints being made against them. I do not think that ap plied to officers of the Commonwealth Police Force. But I do not think that we of the Oppo sition should let this Bill pass through the House without my drawing the attention of the House to what a former Opposition felt about the forma tion of an Australian police force. Such a proposal was first put to this House in 1 975 with the intro duction of legislation which was not enacted be cause of the events of that year, events which en able me to speak in this House now.
T wish to quote from an official document, which was distributed by the present Government

parties, relating to the formation of an Australian police force by combining the then Northern Territory Police Force, Australian Capital Terri tory Police Force, Commonwealth Police Force and the Customs sections of the then Department ofCustoms and Excise. That proposal was put for ward by the officer then in charge of the Depart ment of Customs and Excise, Mr Camody, who was responsible for Customs matters. I shall read from a document which was distributed to the Australian people by members of the present Government, who in fact introduced the legis lation into this Parliament and brought the pro posal to fruition. We have an Australia police force. I do not think anyone honestly believes that we should return to a situation of multiple police forces. Certainly we should not reach a situation in which the police forces are weakened in order to protect people who offend in the Customs area or in other criminal areas for which the Australian Federal Police are responsible. One page of the document is headed: 'from Labor with love'.
Mr Donald Cameron-Who produced that document ?
Mr SCHOLESThe Liberal Party of Australia produced it. The honourable member is a member of that party.
Mr Donald Cameron-Was it produced by the Federal Secretariat or was it invented by some ratbag?
Mr SCHOLES-The Liberal Party produced it and distributed it to almost every house in Vic toria. [t continues with a sub-heading: 'a sinister new police force', Another sub-heading is: 'power ful'. It states:
'The most powerful agency of social control since this country itself was a prison . . .'
That is how sociologist Dr John Helmer (writing in a series
of articles for the Financial Review . . .) described
Labor's proposed Australia Police Force.
Dr Helmer is not alone in his misgivings. Similar fears of this sinister new organisation have been expressed by Vic toria's Council for Civil Liberties, by State and Territorial Police Forces, and even some branches of the ALP itself.
If enabling legislation passes through Parliament, the Australia Police will enjoy unprecedented freedom of search, seizure and entry.
Those are, in fact, the Customs controls. The document continues:
The agency will combine the old Commonwealth Police, the ACT and Northern Territory forces, and the Customs De partment's investigative arm. Its operations will be nation-wide.
Under the sub-heading 'super computer', the document states:
In 1975, the Labor Government ordered for the Australia Police the largest, most complex computer yet installed in Australia.

756 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Complaints (A ustralian Federal Police) Bill

This computer, ifLabor i s returned t o power, will become a monolithic respository for massive amounts of confidential in formation. The computer will store data on such subjects as-
I . All people travelling into or out ofAustralia. 2. Political activists, particularly demonstrators.
I wonder what the Australian Security Intelli gence Organisation was doing during those years and whether it would have been unreasonable if we had known something about the people who took part in the Hilton Hotel bombing, or the people who came i n and assassinated a Turkish diplomat in this country. It might just have been possible that that sort of information was of value to the country.
Mr Donald Cameron-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I require the honourable member for Corio to table this document which he claims is a Liberal Party publication.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage) The honourablemember for Corio is reading from the document, is he not?
Mr SCHOLES-It does not matter. He cannot ask me to table it.
Mr Donald Cameron-I think it is a fictitious document.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The fact is that I cannot require the honourable member for Corio to table the document.
Mr SCHOLES-The document states that the computer will store data on subjects such as:
I . All people travelling into or out of Australia. 2. Political activists, particularly demonstrators. 3. Criminals in all States (fingerprints inciuded)-
What a terrible thing! It continues-
4. Any other information deemednecessary for the Force's efficient operation.
Mr Deputy Speaker, so that I do not delay the proceedings of the House for too long, I seek leave to have this document in its entirety incorporated in Hansard.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is leave granted? Mr Hodgman-I would like to see the docu ment, in may. Mr SCHOLES-It is interesting that Govern ment parties which were prepared to implement a proposal when in office should have acted so irresponsibly when in Opposition as to use as a subject of political activity and political condem nation in order to achieve short-term political gain the formation in Australia of a police force capable of carrying out the functions ofprotecting the Australian people from such things as drugs, interstate criminal activities and organised crime. The formation of an Australian police force was an obvious and necessary step. The Government

parties, in their rush for power, showed a com plete disregard for the best interests of the people of Australia. Probably, had they managed the law enforcement agencies which were available to them during their period of office prior to I 972, some of the things which happened then and have happened since would not have occurred. I ask the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodg man) whether he is prepared to have the docu ment incorporated.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage) -Is leave granted?
Mr Hodgman-Yes. The document is a very accurate indictment of the former Labor Government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There being no objection, leave is granted. The document read asfollows

FROM LABOR WITH LOVE

A sinister new police force

The most powerful agency of social control since this country itself was a prison . . .'

That is how sociologist Dr John Helmer (writing in a series of articles for the Financial Review commencing 10.6.75) de scrihed Labor's proposed Australia Police Force.

Dr Helmer is not alone in his misgivings. Similar fears of this sinister new organisation have been expressed by Vic toria's Council for Civil Uberties, by State and Territorial Police Forces, and even some branches ofthe ALP itself.

If enabling legislation passes through Parliamcnt, the Aus tralian Police will enjoy unprecedented freedom of search, seizure and entry.

The agency will combine the old Commonwealth Police, the ACT and Northern Territory forces, and the Customs De partment's invcstigative arm. Its operations will be nation-wide.

Super computer

In 1 975, the Labor Government ordered for the Australia Police the largest, most complex computer yet installed in Australia.

This computer, if Labor is returned to power, will become a monolithic repository for massive amounts of confidential in formation. The computer will store data on such subjects as-

1 . All people travelling into or out ofAustralia. 2. Political activists, particularly demonstrators. 3. Criminals in all States (fingerprints included) . 4 . Any other information deemed necessary for the Force's efficient operation.

Powerful

Under a Labor Government the Australia Police would

grow into agencies.

the

most

powerful

of

A'ustralian

government

A recently-circulated structure chart shows it will' be

headed by a Chief Commissioner . . . two First Assist

ant Commissioners , . . five Assistant Commissioners

in charge of narcotics, corporate crime, general crime, 'special

services', and 'general policing'.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 757

And that is just a start. The ACT and Northern Territory will have their own Commissioners, while the Customs Bu reau will be headed by a Controller, three First Assistant Secretaries, and eight Assistan t Secretaries.

Then there is the Australia Police Joint Services Division. This will comprise a Secretary, three First Assistant Secre taries, and eight Assistant Secretaries. Several of these people will be concentrating on 'scientific and technical services (whatever t hat means) plus 'intelligence andinformation'.

This will be the biggest, strongest police force Australia has ever known.

'For the first time', writes columnist Tim Hewat, 'Gough Whitlam has got me scared. I am fearful about the secret police structure being put together in Canberra'. (Sunday Ob server 1 2 . 1 0.75.)

'Inthe long term,' writes John Bennett, Secretary, Victorian Council of Civil Liberties, 'the establishment of the force is a major threat to civil liberties.'

But Dr John Helmer, who has conducted a deep study of the new force, offers the most disturbing warnings of all. We quote fromhis articles i n the Financial Review:

'Sociologically speaking, unlimited growth, unlimited power are the inevitahle consequences of a scheme like the Australia Police Force.'
'Neither ombudsmen, nor legislative,safeguards can restrain (the Force) or make it accountable to Parliament or people.'
'Data . . . can be readily organised into a dossier for everyone in the country, and then i ntegrated with the criminal data files, so that whenever the police analyst de mands it, everybody is put under suspicion.'
'The powers the organisation is to have will have the effect ofputting every citizen under surveillance.'

Under a Liberal Government

We are against Labor's Australia Police.

-Malcolm Fraser

Mr SCHOLES-That document, when read by Australians, will show the absolute extremes to which persons such as the honourable member will go.

Mr Hodgman-You lost the 1 975 election and the 1 977 election.

Mr SCHOLES-I realise that and believe that

it is not unreasonable that this House and the

nation should know just how dishonestly the case

against the then Labor Government was pre

sented. The Opposition does not oppose these

Bills. Earlier I indicated some considerations

which I would ask the Minister in charge of the

Bill to take into account. It is of absolute import

ance that both the complainant and the person

complained against have, and are seen to have an

opportunity to ensure that their complaint or de

fence is heard.

properl'y

heard

and

is

seen

to

be

properly

Mr FRY (Fraser) (4.58)-1 support the two Bills before the House. I believe that both are very worthy of support because, I hope, they establish a sound mechanism for citizens to have their com plaints about the Australian Federal Police inves tigated. It is certainly a procedure that is needed

i n the Australian Capital Territory. [ do not know how other honourable members fare but unfortu nately I receive a lot of complaints against the Australian Federal Police. They are not matters that one likes to handle, but if someone has the courage to come along and make a complaint we are under a strong obligation to carry the matter forward.
In the early days, when we had the Australian Capital Territory Police, it was very easy to pass on complaints to the suitable senior officcr or the Commissioner himself and have them investigated and resolved quickly, but with the merging of the Australian Capital Territory Police into the Aus tralian Federal Police this became much more difficult. In the early stages difficulties of com munication did exist. Fortunately, with the co operation of the Commissioner, Sir Colin Woods, we have been able to overcome these difficulties and establish a procedure for handling such complaints.
If we go back in the history of the Australian Federal Police, to which my colleague the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) has referred, it is ironic to remember ' those days of 1 975 when the then Labor Government proposed this amalgamation. There was a tremendous out cry from the Australian Capital Territory Police, led by the top echelons, the tall poppies. They cried out in great anguish that it was a terrible thing to propose, that they would not tolerate it. They encouraged the rank and file members of the service to oppose it. Very bitter feeling against the Labor government was engendered over its pro posals. Later, when amalgamation was proposed again-this time by a Liberal-National Country Party Government, we saw a complete about-face occur. There were moves to quieten opposition and accept the proposals, among the top echelon's of the Australian Capital Territory Police in particular. The word was that this was a great scheme and that everyone should just go along with it quietly. It is easy to see why this occurred. One has only to look at the great promotional oppotunities that were created in the Australian Federal Police at the top leveL These included quite a number of assistant commissionerships. This all meant substantial promotion for people who were already in senior positions. But I can assure honourable members that the proposals were not accepted as gladly by the lower echelons of the force, particularly the Protective Services element of the old Commonwealth Police, who

758 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Taxation System

expressed fairly strong opposition. Many believed available essential information. This statement is

that the new arrangements discriminated against intended, in part, to do that. No economic subject

them. I feel that they had some justification for excites quite the level of interest that taxation ex

that belief.

cites. Few subjects produce such little common

In the course of the creation of the new force, two distinguished knights of the realm were called in to advise us. Sir Robert Mark drew up the orig inal proposal. Then Sir Colin Woods was sent here to lead the new force. I do not doubt the ability of either of these gentlemen and I have the greatest respect for them at the personal level . Nevertheless, they were unfamiliar with the very

ground between different sections of the Aus tralian community. In many ways our existing taxation laws represent an uneasy and not altogether logical compromise between conflict ing interests and pressures in the community. It seems on occasions that the only area in which there is broad agreement is that taxation should be reduced.

intricate State-Commonwealth relationships in

Australia. They had not had experience in work The taxation system is an integral part of our

ing in this environment. They were unfamiliar economic structure. As such, tax changes cannot

with Australian industrial relations generally and take place in a vacuum. Taxation, government

I believe that many of the teething problems spending, budget deficits and inflation are all di

encountered would not have occurred if we had rectly connected. Coping with them is part and

relied instead on some of our top Australian parcel of the task of running a modern economy.

police officers to do the job that these knights of The Government's views on taxation cannot be

the realm were called in to do. I certainly do not divorced, and are not divorced, from its underly

support that aspect of the cultural cringe-the be ing philosophy. We are, and have always been, a

lief that we cannot do things ourselves and must government that believes that individuals should

bring in someone from overseas to carry out these be free to make their own choices and that private

important functions. I believe that we had many enterprise should be given room to play the lead

competent officers who could have carried out ing role in the development of the economy. This

that role. I certainly do not say that in any per leads us inevitably to the view that the Govern

sonal criticism of Sir Colin Woods, who has been ment's role should be as small as is consistent with

most co-operative in helping me carry out my providing the basic environment within which in

duties in connection with police complaints.

dividual freedom and private enterprise can

thrive. Unless taxation changes are consistent

The Bill strengthens slightly the role of the with and achievable within the existing economic

Ombudsman. That is very acceptable and is in ac framework they will frustrate, rather than serve,

cordance with the findings of the Law Reform the Government's economic objectives.

Commission. It is therefore to be applauded,

especially since it is based on co-operation be tween the Ombudsman and the police rather than conflict between them. r seek leave to continue my remarks at a later hour.

The most dominant influence on the level and shape of our taxation system is of course the size of government. Those in the community who espouse the cause ofbiggergovernment are in fact

Leave granted; debate adjourned.

arguing for still higher taxation. Unless debate in

Australia on the subject of taxation fully ac

TAXATION SYSTEM

knowledges the direct link between levels of tax

Ministerial Statement Mr HOWARD (BennelongTreasurer)-by leave-The purpose of this statement is to pro vide the House with an opportunity of debating our present taxation system and, more specifically, to explain in detail the reasons why the Government decided a short while ago not to introduce a broad-based indirect tax. This state

ation and levels of expenditure that debate can have little meaning, Taxation cannot responsibly be reduced unless the room for those reductions is provided by reductions in goverment spending. This Government is prepared neither to finance additional expenditure, nor to reduce taxation, through the inflationary process of expanding the Budget deficit.

ment does not announce changes to the tax system

or to existing levels of taxation. I hope that it will Whilst opinion as to the desirable shape of our

contribute towards a more informed and objective taxation system will vary sharply in the com

debate on the subject of taxation. Such a debate munity it is possible, I believe, to state some broad

cannot occur unless the Government plays its goals. I believe it essential that any taxation sys

part in disclosing its own thinking and makes tem be fair, efficient and, to the maximum extent

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 759

possible, complement the general economic poli cies of the Government. In saying that a taxation system should be fair, that immediately implies that it should be fair in the sense that all of those on whom parliament imposes an obligation to pay tax should in fact pay that tax. This, of course, leads to the subject of tax avoidance and evasion to which I shall return later in this statement.
The concept of fairness also implies that tax should be levied according to capacity to pay. The extent to which this principle should apply must in turn be tempered by the recognition that if marginal tax rates become too high, adverse effects on incentives occur with consequent loss of economic efficiency and productivity and greater resort to tax avoidance. The criterion of efficiency requires not only that the system should be administered in an efficient manner but also that governments should avoid changes which, although providing certain gains, involve compli cated and cumbersome administrative procedures to operate, thus impairing the overall efficiency of the system. It is, of course, fundamental that the taxation system ought to complement the econ omic policies of the government of the day. This involves a whole host of considerations, including the effect of different forms of taxation upon inflation, incentive, investment and economic ac tivity, and the balance between different sectors of the economy. Achieving this objective will often involve a judgment about a requirement or change which might 'serve one particular area of economic policy but not necessarily another. Such a judgment was very much involved in the Government's recent consideration of whether a broadbased indirect tax should be introduced.

International Comparisons Whilst any international comparison has its de fects, no discussion of the Australian taxation sys tem is complete without some comparisons of the level of tax in this country with that in the rest of the world. Those comparisons show that, overall, Australians are less heavily.taxed than people in most industrialised countries. The most recent figures published by the Organisation for Econ omic Co-operation and Development are in re spect of 1 978 and show that total tax revenue at all levels of government as a percentage of gross domestic product averaged 35.8 per cent for the 22 countries for which data are available. For Australia the figure was 28.8 per cent. Only four countries had a lower overall tax burden. The comparable figure for the United Kingdom was 34.5 per cent, the United States of America 30.2 per cent, West Germany 37.8 per cent and socialist Sweden a staggering 53.5 per cent. This fact does not show that Australian taxes should be higher. Indeed it is our .objective to reduce them further. In the Government's view this fact re veals that Australia has a strong tradition of deal ing with many aspects of individual security in the private sector. The Government believes that its own objectives of limiting the role of government to encourage a vigorous private sector in Australia are in harmony with the dominant values of Aus tralians expressed in this statistic. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a table showing these particular comparisons. Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

Table 1 MAJOR TAXATION REVENUES AS PROPORTIONS OF GDP-OECD COUNTRIES, 1 978

Australia

Personal Income Tax
and Employees' Social
Security Contributions
(a)

Personal
Income Tax, Payroll Tax and
All Social Security
Contributions (b)

% Rank

12.6

13

% Rank

14.1

17

Taxes on Corporate
Income (c)
% Rank
3.1

Consumption Taxes

Taxes on Property
(d)

% Rank

2.6

7

General (e)
% Rank 1.7 21

Specific Goods and
Services
(f)
% Rank 6.2

Total

Other Taxes :,
(g)

Total

% Rank 7.9 15

% % Rank 1.2 28.8 1 8

Austria

15.4

10 25.5

1.3 19 1.2 15 8.2

4 4.5 10 12.7

0.7 41.4

Belgium

19.1

4 28.7

2.6

1.2 13 7.8

3.4 19 1 1.2

0.5 44.2

Canada

o.a.

1 3.8

19 . 3.6

3.1

3.8 1 3 3.8 1 3 7.6 16

3.0 3 1 . 1 15

Denmark

22.6

22.8

1.4 18 2.7

4 9.2

6.5

4 15.7

1.0 43.6

Finland

16.1

19.9

I I 1.6 17 0.8 19 7.3

6.8

3 14.1

0.1 36.5 10

France

9.1

15 22.8

1.9 14 1.3 12 8.6

3.5 1 8 12.1

1.6 39.7

Germany

17.0

24.4

2.2 1 2 1 . 1 1 8 5.7 10 3.6 1 5 9.3 1 1

0.8 37.8

760 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 1981

Taxation System

Personal
Income Tax. and Employees'
Social Security
Contributions (a)

Personal Income Tax, Payroll Tax and
All Social
Security Contributions
(b)

Taxes on
Corporate Income (c)

Consumption Taxes

Taxes on Property
(d)

General (e)

Specific Goods and
Services
(f)

Total

Other Taxes
(g)

Total

Greece Ireland Italy Japan Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey UK USA
OECD average

% n.a. 1 1.2 B.6 7.8 18.7 19.9 IB.O 17.2 5.3 6,4 22.6 n.a. n.B. 13.7 13.3
14.5

Rank
14 16 17 5 3 6 7 19 18 2
11 i2

% n,B, 14.1 19.9 1 2.4 27.8 29.8 18.0 25.6 1 1 .3 15,4 38.7 20.8 12.2 18.6 1 8.0
20.7

Rank
18 12 20 4 2 14 5 22 16 I 10 21 13 15

% Rank

n.B.

1.7

15

2.9

7

4,4

2

10.7

I

2.9

6

2,4

10

2.3 I I

n.B.

1.2 20

1.6

16

2.0

13

1.0 21

2.5

9

3,4

4

2.7

% Rank

n.B.

2.0

10

1 .2 16

2.1

9

2.6

6

1.9

II

2.7

5

0.8 20

0,4 22

1.2

17

0,4 21

2.3

8

1.2

14

4.1

I

3.7

2

1.8

% Rank

n.B.

6.5

9

4.6

12

22

5.2

\I

7.5

6

2.5

17

9.6

I

3.B

14

1.8 20

7.0

8

2.7

16

2.2 18

3.1

IS

2.0

19

5.0

% Rank

n.B.

8.B

1

3.7

14

3.6

16

3.3 20

3.6

17

4.0

12

8.0

2

5.9

6

4.1 I I

4.9

8

3.3 21

4.7

9

5.4

7

2.5 22

4.7

% Rank

n,a.

15.3

3

8.3

14

3.6 22

B.5

12

1 1.1

9

6.5

IB

17.6

I

9.7

10

5.9 20

1 1 .9

7

6.0

19

6.9

17

8.5

13

4.5

21

9.7

% n.B. 0.3 0.3 1.6 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.6 4.8 -0.9 0.9 0,4 1.2 0.8 0.6

% Rank

n.a.

33,4 1 2

32.6 1 3

24.1

20

49.9

2

46.8

4

30,4 1 6

46.9

3

26.2

19

22.B 2 1

53.5

1

3 1 .5

14

22.5 22

34.5

II

30.2

17

0.9 35.8

Source: Revenue Statistics ofOECD Member Countries. 1965-1979 OECD 1980.
Notes: (a) Personal income taxincludescapitalgains taxes levied on individuals. Employee's social security contributions cover compulsory contributions made by employees either as a general levy or for specified purposes such as health insurance. (b) 'All Social Security Contributions' include. in addition to contributions by employees. compulsory contributions by employers and self-employed
persons. (c) Includes capital gains taxes levied on companies. (d) Includes rates, land taxes; taxes on net wealth; estate, inheritance and gift duties; taxes on financial transactions; and non-recurrent taxes on property. (e) Includes sales taxes and value added taxes. (f) Includes excise; import duties; export duties; taxes on investment goods; taxes on specific services; and other international taxes. (g) A residual item which includes vehicle registration fees, broadcasting licences, et cetera. It also covers some refunds of taxes and taxes not allocated di
rectly to other categories; for this reason the figure for Spain is negative.

Mr HOWARD-The comparisons to which I have just referred relate to taxation of all kinds. Whilst the overall tax burden in Australia is rela tively low, figures show that Australia places a relatively heavier reliance on personal income tax as a source of revenue than other OEeD member countries. To illustrate, in 1 978 Australia raised 43.7 per cent of its total tax revenue through per sonal income tax, compared with an OEeD aver age of 38.5 per cent. Here as elsewhere in this

statement I am including in personal income tax employee social security contributions of OEeD countries where relevant; these contributions are akin to personal income tax as normally under stood. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table providing this information.
Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

Table 2 SELECTED TAXES AS PROPORTIONS OF TOTAL TAX REVENUES

Personal income tax and employees' Social Security contributions(a)

Personal income tax, all Social Security contributions and Payroll Tax(b)

Consumption(c)
General Consumption Tax(d)

Specific Taxes(e)

Total

Australia Austria Belgium Canada Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Japan

percent
43.7 37.1 43.3 n.a. 5 1 .8 44.2 22.8 45.0 n.a. 33.7 26.4 32.5

Rank
6 12 7
2 4 18 3
14 17 15

percent
49.1 61.5 65.0 44.4 52.4 54.5 57.4 64.5 n.a. 42.4 6 1 .2 5 1.4

Rank
19 7 4 20 17 15 11 5
22 8 18

percent
6. 1 19.8 1 7.6 1 2.3 21.2 20.0 2 1 .6 1 5.1 n.a. 1 9.5 14.2 0.0

Rank
21 5 7 13 2 4 I 9
6 11 22

per cent
21.3 10.9 7.6 1 2.2 14.8 1 8.5 8.8 9.6 n.a. 26.4 1 1.3 1 4.9

Rank
3 14 21 12 10
18 16
1 13 9

percent
27.4 30.6 25.3 24.5 36.0 38.5 30.4 24.7 n.a. 45.9 25.5 14.9

Rank
9 6 11
5 2 8 12
1 10 21

Taxation System

12 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 761

Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom United States

Personal income tax and employees' Social Security contributions(a)

per cent
37.5 42.5 59.4 36.6 20.4 28.1 42.2 n.a. n.a. 40.4 44.0

Rank
11 8
I
13 19 16 9
10 5

Personal income taxI all Social Security contributions and
Payroll Tax(b)

percent
55.8 63.7 59.4 54.5 43.2 67.8 72.4 66.1 54.2 55.1 58.5

Rank
12 6 9 14 21 2
I
3 16 13 10

Consumption(c)

deneral Consumption Tax(d)

per cent
10.4 16. 1 8.4 20.4 14.5 7.7 1 3.2 8.5 9.8 9. 1 6.7

Rank
14 8 18 3 10 19 12 17 15 16 20

Specific Taxes(e)

per cent
6.7 7.7 13.3 1 7.0 22.6 1 7.9 9.1 10.3 20.6 15.5 8.3

Rank
22 20 11
7 2 6 17 15 4 8 19

per cent
1 7.0 23.7 21.7 37.5 37.0 21.3 22.3 1 8.8 30.4 24.6 14.9

Total
Rank
20 15 17 3 4 18 16 19 7 13 22

OECDAverage

38.5

57.0

1 3.3

13.8

26.9

(a) Personal income tax includes capital gains taxes levied on individuals. Employees' social security contributions cover compulsory contributions made byemployees either as a general levy or for specified purposes such as health insurance.
(b) 'All Social Security Contributions' include, in addition to contributions by employees, compulsory contributions by employers and self-employed persons.
(c) Excludes vehicle registration, broadcast licence, and similar fees and taxes.
(d) Comprises value added taxes and sales taxes; for Australia only the wholesale sales tax comes within this category. (e) Comprises excise and customs duties, gambling taxes and, in Australia's case, the crude oil levy.

Mr HOWARD-However, it is important to bear in mind that although we rely rather more heavily on personal income tax than other com parable countries, our absolute levels of personal income tax are lower than the OECD average. Once again, to illustrate from Table 1 the OECD average for personal income tax was 14.5 per cent of GDP in 1 978; the Australian figure was 1 2.6 per cent of GDP. As Table 2 shows, in 1 978 Australia ranked ninth of 22 member countries in terms of reliance on all types of consumption taxes, but we were twenty-first in terms of 'gen eral' or sales taxes, and on other taxes such as excise and customs duties and levies. This difference reflects Australia's l arge collections from 'specific' taxes such as the crude oil levy and traditional excise duties on beer, potable spirits, tobacco products and petroleum products. Together these yield almost three times as much revenue as sales taxes. Moreover, these specific taxes, together with sales tax on motor vehicles and parts, account for over 80 per cent of our total taxes on goods and services. Since 1 978, of course, the contribution from the crude oil levy has risen sharply and in the current year is estimated to yield almost 1 0 per cent of Common wealth taxation revenues. In summary, there fore, our overall tax burden is lower than the av erage of the industrialised world. We do, however, rely rather more on personal tax as a source of revenue, although our level of personal tax is still lower than the OECD average. To the extent that we collect revenue through indirect taxation, such collections tend to be concentrated on a very lim ited number of consumption items.

Trends in Taxation and Expenditure It has been the common experience of Western countries during the past 25 years for both expen diture and tax to rise as proportions of GDP. Australia has been no exception to this general pattern, although a number of particular obser vations can be made about our own experience. In the post-war period up to 1 973-74, there was little change in Commonwealth tax receipts as a pro portion of GDP, although the proportion of State and local tax receipts roughly doubled during that period. However, Commonwealth tax receipts rose from 2 1 .3 per cent of GDP in 1 973-74 to 23.2 per cent of GDP in 1 975-76, during which time Commonwealth expenditure as a proportion of GDP rose from 24.6 to 30.7 per cent.
During the five years this Government has been in office, Commonwealth tax receipts as a pro portion of GDP have risen from 23.2 per cent to an estimated 24.8 per cent in the current financial year. During this period, however, in contrast to the earlier period, there has been a substantial re duction in the deficit. This is due in large measure to the expenditure restraint applied by this Government. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table providing relevant information.
Leave granted.
The table read asfollows-

762 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Taxation System

Table 3
AUSTRALIA: TOTAL TAXATION RECEIPTS BY LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT AS A PROPORTION OF
GDP
(Percentage)

Year

Common-

State

wealth and Local

Total

1 948-49 1 949-50 1 9 50-51 1 951-52 1 952-53 1 953-54 1 954-55 1 955-56 1 956-57 1 957-58 1958-59 1 9 59-60 1960-61 1 961-62 1 962-63 1 963-64 1 964-65 1 965-66 1 966-67 1 967-68 1 968-69 1 969-70 1 970-71 1 9 7 1 -72 1972-73 1 973-74 1 974-75 1 975-76 1 976-77 1 977-78 1 978-79 1 979-80

22.0

2.9

25.0

20.0

2.9

22.8

2 1 .4

2.6

24.0

25.4

3.0

28.4

2 1 .6

3.1

24.7

20.1

3.1

23.2

1 9.6

3.2

22.8

1 9.4

3.3

22.6

1 9.5

3.5

23.0

20.2

3.7

23.9

1 8.4

3.8

22.2

1 8.4

3.8

22.3

1 9.6

3.8

23.4

1 9.2

4.0

23.2

1 8. 1

4.1

22.2

1 8.2

4.1

22.3

19.5

4. 1

23.5

20.5

4.2

24.7

1 9.8

4.2

24.1

20.5

4.5

25.0

20.3

4.5

24.8

21.1

4.4

25.6

2 1 .6

4.2

25.8

2 1 .2

5.0

26.2

19.9

5.3

25.2

21.3

5.4

26.8

22.8

5.7

28.5

23.2

6.0

29.2

23.6

6. 1

29.7

23.6

6. 1

29.7

23.0

5.8

28.8

24.0

na

na

Sources: ABS Australian National Accounts, Taxation Revenue Australia, Budget Papers-various issues.

Notes: (i) Payroll tax was transferred to the States from the beginning of 1971-72. In 1 970-71 Commonwealth collections ofpayroll tax amounted to $295 million, equivalent to 0.9 per cent ofGDP.
(ii) Collections of the wool tax and certain other primary production taxes have not been included in Commonwealth taxation receipts since 1 974-75.
(iii) Part of the increase in Commonwealth Taxation Re ceipts in 1 976-77 was due to the abolition ofrebates for depen dent children and their replacement by family allowances. The abolition of the rebates was estimated to increase per sonal income taxes by $540m in 1 976-77 and $700m in a full year. These amounts were equivalent to 0.7 and 0.9 per cent respectively of 1 976-77 GDP.
Mr HOWARD-Furthermore, Common wealth taxation receipts since 1 976 have been somewhat inflated by the introduction in May of that year of family allowances, which were in sig nificant measure financed through the withdrawal of concessional rebates for children. It is abun dantly clear from this analysis that if the expendi ture restraint of the last five years had not been realised then our tax burden today, or the deficit, or both, would be significantly higher.
During most of the past 25 years, personal in come tax as a proportion of total Commonwealth revenue has grown appreciably, although there has been a small decline in more recent years, partly as a consequence of the introduction of the standard rate system and indexation adjustments, and partly as a consequence of the growth in the crude oil levy. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing the composition of Commonwealth Budget taxation receipts.
Leave granted.
The table read asfollows-

Table 4 COMPOSITION OF COMMONWEALTH BUDGET TAXATION REVENUES

Year
1 948-49 1 949-50 1950-5 1 1 9 5 1 -52 1 952-53 1 9 5 3-54 1 954-55 1 955-56 1 956-57 1957-58 1958-59 1 959-60 1 960-61 1 9 6 1 -62 1 962-63 1 963-64 1 964-65 1 965-66 1 966-67

Personal income tax
4 1 .9 38.5 49.8 43.3 43.5 43.5 38.3 38.4 36.5 37.2 34.1 35.0 36.4 37.5 37.1 39.0 40.9 40.8 42.5

Customs and Company Excise and
tax Sales Tax

1 5.3

34.7

16.4

36.6

1 2.5

30.7

16.3

33.5

1 8.7

30.7

1 4.8

34.9

1 8.2

36.6

18.5

36.3

1 9.5

37.2

1 8.4

37.7

1 9.2

39.6

1 8. 1

39.6

20.2

37.3

20.3

34.9

1 8.4

36.8

1 8.5

35.0

1 8. 9

32.9

19.3

32.9

1 7.9

32.4

Crude oil levy

Other
8:1 . 8.5 7.0 6.9 7. 1 6.8 6.9 6.8 6.8 6.7 7. 1 7.3 6.1 7.3 7.7 7.5 8.1 7.0 7.2

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 763

Year

Customs and

Personal Company Excise and

income tax

tax Sales Tax

Crude oil levy

Other

1967-68 1 968-69 1969-70 1 970-71 1 9 7 1 -72 1972-73 1973-74 1 974-75 1975-76 1 976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1 979-80 1980-81 (e)

43.7

1 7.2

31.8

7.3

42.7

1 8.7

31.3

7.3

44.5

1 8.6

29.9

7.0

43.8

1 9.9

29.7

6.6

47.3

19.3

29.7

3.7

48.2

1 9.3

30.0

2.5

50.2

1 8.6

28.6

2.6

54.8

1 7.4

26.4

1 .4

54.7

1 5.5

26.8

1.6

1 .4

56.3

15.2

25.8

1 .8

0.9

56.8

1 5. 1

24.6

2.2

1 .3

55.0

1 3.5

25. 1

5.3

1.1

55.1

1 3.0

22.7

8.3

0.9

53.7

14.7

21 .0

9.9

0.7

Sources: ABS Australian National Accounts, Taxation Revenue Australia, Budget Papers various issues.
Notes: (i) Payroll tax was transferred to the States from the beginning of 1 97 1 -72. In 1970-71 Commonwealth collections ofpayroll tax amounted to $295 million, equivalent to 4.1 per cent of total Commonwealth taxation revenues.
(ii) Collections of the wool tax and certain other primary production taxes have not been in cluded in Commonwealthtaxation receipts since 1 974-75.
(iii) Part of the increase in Commonwealth Taxation Receipts in 1976-77 was due to the abol ition of rebates for dependent children and their replacement by family allowances. The abolition of the rebates was estimated to increase personal income tax by $540m in 1 976-77 and by $700m in a full year. These amounts were equivalent to 2.7 and 3.6 per cent respectively of total Com monwealth taxation revenues in 1976-77.

Mr HOWARD-I thank the House. This Government's Tax Initiatives
Since its election the present Government has initiated a number of major reforms and improve ments to the taxation system. The standard rate system introduced in the 1 977 Budget provided a significant reform to personal income tax. The number of steps in the rate scale was reduced from seven to three. Some 225,000 people, includ ing many pensioners, were freed altogether from

the liability to pay tax. These changes removed many of the adverse effects on incentive which existed under the rate scales they replaced.
I seek leave to have incorporatedin Hansard a table comparing marginal rates of tax applying at different levels of income under the standard rate system and previous rate scales.
Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

Table 5 STANDARD RATE SCALE AT TIME OF INTRODUCTION AND IMMEDIATELY P,RECEDING SCALE
Rates ofIncome Tax before commencement ofStandard Rate System (a)

Total Taxable Income

Not less than

Not more than

Tax at General Rates on total Taxable Income

$ 1 2,506

$ 2,506 6,266

$ nil + 20c for each $ 1 501 .20+ 27c for each $ 1 i n excess of

$ 2,506

6,266

12,532

1,516.40 + 35c for each $1 in excess of

6,266

12,532

1 8,798

3,709.50 + 45c for each $1 in excess of

1 2,532

1 8 ,798

25,063

6,529.20 + S5c for each $1 in excess of

1 8,798

25,063

3 1,329

9,974.95 + 60c for each $1 in excess of

25,063

3 1,329

and over

1 3,734.55 + 65c for each $1 in excess of

31 ,329

(a) Allowance of the $676 general rebate meantthat there was a zero effective rate up to income of $3,1 53.

764 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Taxation System

Total Taxable Income

Not less than

Not more than

$
I
3,750 1 6,000 32,000

$ 3,750 1 6,000 32,000 and over

STANDARD RATE SCALE
Tax on Total Taxable I ncome $
NIL NIL + 32c for each $1 in excess of 3,920.00 + 46c for each $1 in excess of 1 1,280.00 + 60c for each $1 in excess of

$ 3,750 1 6,000 32,000

Mr HOWARD-At the time of establishing this new rate scale about 90 per cent of taxpayers were on the standard rate and the top of this step was sufficiently high to permit average wage earners to earn substantial additional amounts of income and still attract only the standard mar ginal rate. Whilst there has been some abatement of these advantages over the past three years, 80 per cent of taxpayers are still on the standard rate and the top of that step is still about 20 per cent above average weekly earnings. Whilst it is of course a taxpayers marginal rate that is relevant to decisions to earn additional income, this rate does not indicate the percentage of a person's in come payable as tax. Because of the zero rate on taxable income up to $4,041 , taxpayers on the standard rate pay significantly less than 32 per cent of their income as tax. Similarly, a taxpayer on a higher marginal rate has an average rate con siderably less than his marginal rate.
Thus, although the maximum marginal rate of 60 per cent begins at a taxable income of $34,478, the average rate for a taxpayer without depend ants does not reach even 50 per cent until his tax able income reaches $85,335. An individual on av erage earnings-which in September 1 980 were $ 1 3,941 per annum-has an average tax rate of 22.7 per cent. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which compares average and marginal rates in 1 980-8 1 , for taxpayers without dependants, at various income levels.
Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

TABLE 6

Comparison of Average and Marginal Rates for Taxpayers without Dependants, 1980-81
----------------

Taxable income

Marginal Average

rate

rate

$ 8,000 9,658 (a) 13,941 (b) 17,239 (e)

%

%

32

1 5.8

32

1 8.6

32

22.7

46

24.5

Taxable income

Marginal Average

rate

rate

$ 26,471 34,478 (d) 50,000

%

%

46

32.0

60

35.2

60

42.9

(a) Minimum award earnings, September 1 980 (b) Average earnings, September 1980 (c) Top ofstandard rate step (d) Top of 46 per cent rate step
Mr HOWARD-Full tax indexation applied in 1 976-77 and 1 977-78. The standard rate scale was half-indexed in 1 978-79 and in the current financial year. The abolition of gift and estate duties provided long-sought relief to many Aus tralian families. In the business sector the invest ment allowance has provided major incentives for all sectors of Australian business and has no doubt played its part in the enormous private sector capital investment now under way. Tax averaging provisions for primary producers have been improved and enable primary producers to even out the inevitable fluctuations in taxable incomes which occur in rural Australia. Of major assist ance to small business has been the expansion in the retention allowance from 50 per cent to 70 per cent.
Major exploration incentives have been pro vided to the mining industry as well as incentives to the tourist industry and incentives for energy conservation. The sales tax reduction on motor vehicles in 1 978 provided a significant boost to an industry then experiencing subdued sales. In the last Budget this Government provided a sig nificant tax concession for the self-employed re garding their provision for superannuation. No government has done more than this one to stamp out blatant and artificial tax avoidance practices. As I mentioned earlier, I shall return to this mat ter later.
Unlike many other countries, Australia taxes the individual as the basic unit. As a consequence, the tax burden of single income families is greater than two-income families at equivalent family in come levels. I seek leave to incorporate in

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 765

Hansard a table comparing the tax positions of single and double income families.
Leave granted. The table read asfollows
TABLE 7 Tax payable by single income family compared with tax
payable by two income family

Joint income
$ 1 0,000 1 5,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 40,000 50,000

Single income
$ 1 ,1 07 2,707 4,693 6,993 9,293 14,667 20,667

50/50 split
$ 614 2,2 1 4 3,814 5,414 7,014 1 0,987 1 5,587

Difference
$% 493 45 493 1 8 879 19 1 ,579 23 2,279 25 3,680 25 5,080 25

Mr HOWARD:-It is worth noting that of the total number of married taxpayers of 3,750,000, some 1 ,250,000 have a dependent spouse. Various proposals have been put to the Government to allow full income splitting for all married tax payers. Some taxpayers in this category, by reason of their professions or businesses, already enjoy the benefits, in whole or in part, of income split ting. It is estimated that the cost to revenue of full income splitting would be in the order of $ 1 , 1 00m in a full year.
To respond in part to what it saw as an imbal ance in the tax system against single income famil ies, the Government increased the dependent spouse rebate last year by 34 per cent from $597 to $800 a year. In all our analysis of changes to the taxation system, we should never lose sight of the impact of inflation upon a progressive tax scale. I can best illustrate by pointing out that in 1954-55 the maximum marginal rate began to apply at almost 1 8 times average earnings. By 1 969-70, it began to apply at 8 times average earnings; by 1 975-76 at 2.8 times average earnings; and by 1 979-80 at 2.6 times average earnings. The domi nant influence producing that trend has clearly been the effect of high rates of inflation on money incomes, which was particularly severe during the early 1 9 70s.
Recent Review of Taxation Mix The House will be aware of my announcement last November that the Government had decided to examine certain options for change to the present taxation system. We particularly had in mind whether the time had come to shift a greater burden of the revenue raising effort towards gen eral consumption taxes, thus enabling reductions in personal income tax. The purpose of that exer cise was to assess the desirability of altering the

mix or combination of taxes, to the extent poss ible, in the context of reducing the overall burden of taxation; it was not to bring about an increase in the overall taxation burden. In conducting this examination the Government already had avail able to it a wealth of material canvassing options for change to our system. These included in par ticular the very comprehensive Asprey report completed in 1 975.
As well as receiving advice from the Treasury and the Australian Taxation Office, I sought the views of a number of industry groups as well as those of the trade union movement and the Government's Taxation Advisory Committee. The Government was conscious when it commen ced its examination that there were strong argu ments both for and against greater reliance on in direct taxation. The arguments for a change included:
( 1 ) greater community sensitivity towards personal income tax, being as it is the most visible form of taxation;
(2) the economic advantages of a different mix of taxation, particularly if a greater re liance on indirect tax takes the form of ap plying to a broad range of goods and ser vices. I cite particularly the need to avoid disincentive to saving, investment and risk taking and to obtain greater flexibility in demand and revenue management;
(3) indirect taxation is somewhat harder to evade and avoid than personal income tax; and
(4) the possibility that revenue from the crude oil levy would grow less rapidly in the years immediately ahead.
The major arguments against a change were seen as-
( 1 ) the effect of any change on the consumer price index, particularly at a time when inflationary expectations are delicately balanced;
(2) the consequences of any additional anti inflationary measures the Government might find necessary to apply;
( 3 ) the regressive effects that certain forms of indirect taxation can have, although these effects will vary in intensity according to the items included in any broadened in direct tax base.
There were essentially three options for change. These were extending the coverage of the existing wholesale tax to additional goods and also im posing a tax on selected services; introduction of a general retail sales tax, that is, a tax paid by con sumers at the final point of sale; and a value added

766 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Taxation System

tax which would b e imposed a t all stages of the production and distribution chain for goods and services. A multi-stage VAT was rejected fairly quickly because it would have imposed an enor mous paper work burden on both taxpayers and collecting authorities. A retail turnover tax had some strong arguments in its favour, particularly its lack of bias on expenditure patterns and its ability to generate substantial revenue from low rates of tax.
It was calculated that the potential value in any one year of sales of goods and services to con sumers was some $70,OOOm and after allowing for those items which for constitutional or practical reasons it would be very difficult to tax, it was be lieved that the potential base for a retail turnover tax on goods and services was in the order of $55,OOOm to $60,000m. However, a retail turn over tax would have involved a very extensive licensing system, and the necessity for a significant increase in the number of taxpaying units perhaps as many as 350,000-and also additional administrative staff of about 3,500. There was the further complication that a period of two years would have elapsed before a retail turnover tax on goods and services could have been fully in place.
We concluded that therefore, if we were to broaden the indirect tax base, the simplest method would be to extend the existing wholesale sales tax to some goods now exempt and to impose a tax on selected services. Administratively, the former would be quite straightforward and could be implemented quickly; in the main it would in volve a small number of relatively large businesses with developed accounting systems.
The supplementary tax on selected services posed rather more difficulties and could have taken more than 1 2 months to implement, depending on the number and character of the services that might be taxed. Although the practi cal problems posed by an expansion of the whole sale tax base and the introduction of a tax on selected services would have been considerably less than those involved in the other options be fore the Government there were, nonetheless, a number of difficulties involved in such a change.
There was of course the very basic question of whether there should be any exemption in a broadened wholesale tax base. For example, were basic foodstuffs to be exempted and, if so, which ones? Should prescribed medicines be included? Should goods subject to excise be exempt? Should inputs to further production such as building materials be exempt? In this connection, it is worth noting that if food and clothing, for example, were exempt this would more than

halve the coverage of expenditure and thus the revenue base.
There was also the problem of the rate struc ture. Whilst a single rate of tax would have been very attractive from an administrative point of view, the graduation in the existing wholesale tax scales suggested that goods and services which could not properly be regarded as necessities should be taxed at a higher rate than commodities seen as essential to everyday life. The introduction of a tax on selected services would, of course, have broken new ground. That, of itself, would have in volved the difficulties of educating the large number of new taxpayers and recruiting and training administrative staff. There were also some problems to be resolved on how to avoid double taxation of goods which form part of a service.
It should also be noted that given certain consti tutional and other constraints, the base for tax ation of services is somewhat more limited than might be imagined. For example, some obvious candidates like betting and gambling are already the subject of State taxes, while interstate passen ger and freight movements fall outside the Com monwealth's taxation powers. In addition, it would have been undesirable to tax public ser vices such as those provided by educational insti tutions and hospitals.
Throughout its consideration of this issue, the Government remained firmly of the view that if a shift towards greater emphasis on indirect tax ation were to occur, it should be accompanied by a noticeable reduction in personal income tax. The Government was aware when it commenced its examination that any increase in indirect tax ation would affect the consumer price index. However, it was not until detailed projections of likely price effects as a consequence of particular levels of indirect taxation and also the cost to rev enue of compensating personal tax reductions be came known that the total implications of a shift towards greater reliance on indirect tax were fully appreciated by the Government.
There was-and perhaps still is-a fairly widely-held view in the community that a quite noticeable reduction in personal income tax can be achieved through a relatively modest increase in reliance on indirect taxation. That is re grettably not the case. Let me illustrate by describing the considerations which finally led to the Government's decision. In deciding whether to broaden the wholesale tax base or to retain the

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 767

status quo, the Government was caught in the di lemma of not wishing to move towards greater re liance on indirect tax without providing a notice able offset in personal tax reductions while being anxious to minimise the inflationary consequences of collecting additional revenue.
It soon became apparent that both of these objectives could not be achieved. It was not poss ible to raise sufficient additional indirect taxation to provide noticeable personal tax relief without adding to the consumer price index in a major way. For example, to reduce the existing personal income tax scale by lc at each step would cost the revenue $61 Om in 1 980-8 1 . Therefore, to convert the existing 32/46/60 rate scale into, say, a 27/41 /55 rate scale, a total cost to revenue of about $3,OOOm would be involved. As a general rule, each additional $500m raised through in direct taxes results in direct and indirect additions to the consumer price index of almost 1 per cent. Furthermore, there are additional flow-on conse quences for the consumer price index through the wage system which are hard to quantify.
There was the disturbing possibility that the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Com mission could not be persuaded to discount effec tively for the price effects of a shift towards greater reliance on indirect taxation. It will be thus seen that in order to have raised sufficient revenue to bring about the personal tax reduction I have mentioned, the direct and indirect price effects would have been about 6 per cent, with at least the strong possibility of substantial ad ditional flow-on consequences via the wage fixation system.
I should emphasise that the example of reduc ing personal taxation which I have just used does not in any way misrepresent the cost to revenue of various changes to the burden of personal income tax. For example, full tax indexation in the cur rent financial year would cost the revenue about $ 1 ,OOOm. A $ 1 00 increase in the tax-free threshold of $4,041 would cost $200m and a $ 1 00 increase in the dependent spouse rebate would cost about $1 70m.
Apart from these revenue considerations there would also have been a noticeable addition to expenditure as a consequence of the automatic indexation of pensions and benefits-in fact in the order of $75m for each I per cent addition to the CPI-as well as the costs of any other compensa tory action which may have been thought necess ary in respect of those on low incomes. In reach ing its decision, the Government naturally gave thought to future revenue trends. This involved not only making certain assumptions based on

likely growth in the community, but also having regard to the fact that under existing policy pro ceeds of the crude oil levy might begin to level out in real terms in the next couple of years. It should be said that these projections are necessarily difficult to make and reflect a large number of assumptions and judgments.
The Australian economy is now growing very strongly. Provided the right economic policies are continued, the prospects are for reasonable levels of sustained growth through the 1 980s. As I am sure the House will appreciate, the impact of this on revenue collections from the existing taxation base is quite considerable. One of the by-products of greater economic activity is an increase in tax ation revenues as the tax base grows. Whilst, once again, projections are difficult to make with pre cision, there is gathering evidence that the growth in prospect in the Australian economy over the next four or five years will prove stronger than had been anticipated even 1 2 months ago. As a graphic illustration of this, the indications are that private sector capital investment in 1 980-8 1 is likely to grow by about 20 per cent in real terms. These developments endorse the view that, provided-this is an important proviso-rigorous expenditure restraint can be applied and main tained in the years immediately ahead, a respon sible fiscal outcome can be achieved without a rise in the overall tax burden. It should nonetheless be noted that even in a situation where the overall tax burden did not rise at all, or even fell, personal income tax would under present policies be likely to assume a greater share of that overall burden.
I mportant though these practical difficulties and future revenue considerations were, the fun damental reason for the Government's decision was its concern at the impact on inflation and inflationary expectations of any significant shift towards greater reliance on indirect taxation. This Government has fought long and hard to restore domestic economic conditions of growth and stab ility and to retrieve this country's international reputation as a low inflation, economically stable nation. There is no more conspicuous hallmark of these achievements than our continued ability to contain inflation. Perceptions and expectations assume great relevance in economic matters. Rightly or wrongly, no economic indicator is more universally regarded as a barometer of a govern ment's success or failure in economic manage ment than the consumer price index. Therefore, and despite obvious advantages from many other points of view, the Government came firmly to the conclusion that the inevitable squandering of the gains made and maintained in the fight against

768 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 198 1

Taxation System

inflation in recent years was a price it was not pre have been raised as to whether sufficient oppor

pared to pay.

tunity exists for the small investor to participate

Other Taxes

in resource development. It is undeniable that in recent years there has been a marked trend

No statement of this kind would be complete towards larger equity holdings by institutions at

without some reference to other forms of tax the expense of the individual investor. The tax

ation. Unlike most other OECD countries, ation system is frequently blamed for this devel

Australia does not impose any general capital opment and it may well be that the existing tax

taxes at the Federal level. Other OECD countries ation treatment of inter alia dividend income has

levy one or more of capital gains taxes, net wealth discouraged the small investor. The matter is not,

taxes or death duties. Australia does not have a however, free from doubt and such evidence as is

capital gains tax or a net wealth tax and, as I available suggests that the trend I have mentioned

noted earlier, the Commonwealth has ceased has occurred in those countries which treat divi

levying gift and estate duty and of course the dend income more generously than does Australia

States have either removed or substantially cut as well as those which have a similar approach to

back their probate duties. With the exception ours. This matter has been the subject of sub

therefore of taxes on specific forms of property, missions to and investigation by the Campbell

such as local government rates and State land Committee of Inquiry into the Australian

taxes, Australians are very largely free of capital Financial System. The Government will await

taxes. If the experience of other countries is any with interest the views of that inquiry on this sub

guide, general capital taxes are unlikely to raise ject. ] should make it plain that the Government

substantial amounts of revenue unless imposed at is anxious to respond in an appropriate way to the

very high rates. If that were to occur there would desire of individual Australians to participate in

be a real risk of undesirable effects on the tax our development.

structure and the economy. It is a plain fact that if

any capital gains tax were to exclude basic hold

Tax Avoidance

ings, such as the family home, then in order to yield large amounts of revenue it would be necess ary to impose it at a quite significant rate on other assets.

A conspicuous feature of this Government's ap proach to taxation has been its uncompromising attack upon tax avoidance. The Government is determined to deal with those who seek to avoid

The Government is opposed to the introduc payment of their fair share of taxation. Such

tion of a resources tax. It believes that many of the people push the tax burden more heavily on to the advocates of such a tax ignore the disincentive great majority of citizens who are responsible tax

effects such a tax would have on investment and payers. They are justifiably resented. The

development in Australia. They also ignore the Government's record on tax avoidance and contribution which companies earning very large evasion is evidence enough of its resolve to bear profits make towards Commonwealth and State down on it. Since 1977, nine Bills incorporating

revenues through the existing tax structure. This some 24 legislative measures against income tax

occurs through not only company tax but also avoidance arrangements have been introduced. royalties paid to State governments. As my col Other amendments have been enacted to deal

league the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) with sales tax avoidance arrangements. More

noted in the House the other day, a recent mining measures directed against income tax avoidance

industry survey showed that, of 8 1 mining have been announced in four separate statements companies questioned, government charges and issued by me in the past year. All areas of avoid

taxes represented 56 per cent of the companies' ance have been tackled. We have acted both

pre-tax operating profits and that the companies against schemes creating deductions and against

involved paid a total of $ I , 1 1 3m to different schemes which attempt to shield income from tax.

governments in 1 979-80.

We have adopted a policy of banning the carry

The tax system is not the only mechanism through which the Government can ensure that

forward of paper losses from schemes entered into before the operative date of remedial legislation.

Australians receive a fair share of the develop Decisive action has also been taken against cer

ment of our natural resources. Our foreign invest tain forms of tax evasion. Last year, the Crimes

ment policy, which has been and will be fully ap (Taxation Offences) Act was passed into law.

plied, required as a general rule Australian equity This legislation was an entirely appropriate and

participation of at least 50 per cent Australian necessary response to fraudulent conduct de

ownership, or 75 per cent Australian ownership in signed to prevent the collection of lawfully pay

the case of uranium projects. Recently questions able tax. It contains penalties of five years gaol

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 769

and fines of up to $50,000 for those who act, or aid or abet someone to act, to prevent the collection of lawfully payable tax. Honourable members will be aware that the Government has been engaged for some time in the task of rewriting sec tion 260 which is the general anti-avoidance pro vision of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Those who criticise the time taken do not appreciate the significant task involved in this exercise. The Government has the twin aim in this area of devis ing an effective anti-avoidance section whilst not getting in the way of legitimate commercial trans actions and arrangements. The balance to be struck is a delicate one and considerable care is required if both these aims are to be realised.
The work on section 260 has involved not only officers of the Australian Taxation Office but also the obtaining of advice from private counsel. I have also sought the advice of the Government's Taxation Advisory Committee which in the 12 months of its existence has provided invaluable private sector professional comment upon tax ation legislation. I have sought the advice on this matter of the Government members Taxation Sub-committee. During the three years that I have been Treasurer, it has provided invaluable comment and assistance to me on all aspects of taxation legislation.
The process of re-writing section 260 is neal' to an end and I hope soon to present it to Parlia ment. Proper time will be allowed for comment before Parliament is asked to approve the new section.
In recent days I have told the House that sec tion 1 36, which deals in principle with transfer pricing arrangements by certain companies, is also under review, particularly as a consequence of the decision of the High Court last year in the Com monwealth Aluminium Corporation Ltd case. The case appears to indicate that the power of the Commissioner of Taxation to fix an arms length price is considerably less than previously believed. I repeat previous assurances given to the House that this Government will remain tenacious in seeking out and dealing with taxation avoidance arrangements.
Conclusion Debate on taxation can never be wholly conclus ive. It is an inherently controversial subject. Opinion as to the appropriate shape of our tax ation system will vary sharply throughout the community. It has not been possible for me in this statement to canvass all aspects of our taxation system. I have, however, endeavoured to put con sideration of our taxation system into a better per spective and to state some of the realities which

must be accepted if sensible debate on taxation is to occur. The most dominant reality is that governments cannot tax less unless they spend less.
This Government remains committed to further reforms to, and where possible reductions in, levels of taxation. Progress towards these goals cannot proceed in isolation from the general con duct of economic policy. To the extent that we are successful in achieving our economic goals, so we shall be successful, I believe, in achieving our broad objectives in the area of taxation. I com mend the statement to the House. I present the following paper:
Taxation System-Ministerial Statement, 1 2 March 1 98 1 , together with 7 related tables.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Motion (by Mr Fife) -by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Gellibrand speak ing for a period not exceeding 45 minutes.
Mr W ILLIS ( Gellibrand) ( 5 .48) -The Treasurer (Mr Howard) informed us that his statement was designed to stimulate discussion about taxation and inform the people of Australia on the Government's thinking on tax. I cannot im agine that the people of Australia are feeling ter ribly enthralled at what they have just heard for the last three quarters of an hour from the Treasurer. In the main he has given them a rehash of past statements, coloured and flavoured a little with some interesting information on overseas comparisons, which has not been used by him be fore and which does not support the thrust towards which he has been trying to direct government taxation policy. This statement must be seen as an attempt by the Treasurer to keep alive the prospect of the introduction at some future date of a broad-based indirect tax.
In the past two years the Treasurer has twice tried to get the Government to agree to the im plementation of a broad-based indirect tax; that is, a tax which would apply to the general array of goods and services which are purchased by con sumers in this country. Twice he has been unsuc cessful in trying to get the Government to adopt his position. In this statement today we see him again spelling out the advantages, as he sees them, of such a scheme and quite c learly trying to keep alive the possibility of the introduction of such a tax at a future date. Perhaps he has hopes that in the not too distant future he will get inflation down to a level where the Government will be prepared to accept an increase in inflation which would result from such a tax. Frankly, I do not

770 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Taxation System

share his optimism. As I have already mentioned the Treasurer has ignored in his international comparisons a fundamental fact which totally de stroys the thrust of his own belief that there ought to. be a broad-based indirect tax in this country and that the tax system should be shifted sig nificantly more towards an indirect collection basis rather than a direct tax basis. That is his pos ition. It is not supported by the international com parisons which he spent a considerable amount of time discussing. '
Table 2 of the tables which he incorporated in Hansard sets out the selected taxes as proportions of total tax revenues. It includes a category for consumption taxes. These are taxes on goods and services purchased by consumers. In Australia we see that 27.4 per cent of total tax revenue comes from such taxes. But the average of the Organis ation for Economic Co-operation and Develop ment countries is only 26.9 per cent. Quite clearly we are already above the OECD average-the av erage of other developed industrialised countries-for collection of taxes from this form ofindirect taxation. I appreciate that the compo sition of those indirect tax collections varies from country to country, but what matters in the end is the overall proportion which comes from indirect taxes.
Australia's figure is above the OECD average. It is well above that of the countries with which we like to compare ourselves, such as the U nited States of America. In the United States of America we see that 1 4.9 per cent of total tax col lections come from indirect taxes. The Australian figure is 27.4 per cent. Quite obviously Australia has higher indirect tax collections than many other countries. It follows from that that no argu ment is to be found in the international compari son figures for Australia to be thinking of moving towards a broad-based indirect tax and to be mak ing a strong move towards collecting a higher pro portion of its taxes in the form ofindirect taxation rather than in the form of direct taxation. Nothing that the Treasurer has been able to point to in respect of these international tax comparison figures supports in any way the thrust of his own belief and argument within the Government-an argument which thankfully he has not as yet been able to convince his colleagues to adopt. As I say, I fear that this statement represents an attempt by him to continue to battle for that at some future. date and to keep alive that possibility.
The move towards a broad-based indirect tax system would have been highly undesirable. There is no way that we on this side of the House can see such a move as being advantageous for the people of Australia generally, least of all those who have

borne the brunt of the Government's taxation policies over the last few years; that is, the lower middle income earners who in comparison with other groups I will come to later have paid an increasingly high proportion of their incomes in tax while this Government has been in office.
The first aspect that would flow from a move to indirect taxation-that is, a higher proportion of our taxes being collected through indirect tax-is that it would be inflationary. The Treasurer has clearly admitted this in his statement. Obviously that would be a highly detrimental aspect. That would be the case whenever the implementation of such a system was attempted. Even if we had zero inflation at the present time, if we introduced such a tax it would mean an enormous infla tionary shock. As the Treasurer has said, the in troduction of a broad-based tax to provide toom for a $3 ,000m cut in personal income tax would mean a 6 per cent increase in inflation. A 6 per cent increase in inflation at any time would give the economy an enormous shock and be utterly deterimental to the economic welfare of this nation.
The fact that we have an inflation rate of 9 per cent or 1 0 per cent at present does not mean that at some future date when the inflation rate is lower-I do not see that happening under this Government-a better environment will be created in which to introduce such a tax. It would still have an enormous shock effect on the econ omy and be utterly detrimental to our economic welfare. Of course, it would also make the tax sys tem much less equitable. Equity is something that this Government has little to talk about in respect of taxation. It has made the tax system in this country far less equitable since it came to office. A move to greater indirect taxation would have meant a far less equitable tax system. The low and middle income earners would have borne the brunt of an even higher proportion of tax than they already bear.
The reason that such a move would have made the tax system more inequitable is that indirect taxation-taxation on goods and services-is by its very nature regressive. The effect it has on people on low incomes is much greater than its effect on people on higher incomes. The tax paid is the same regardless of income. A person buying a packet of cigarettes pays the same tax on that packet of cigarettes whether he is on the mini mum wage, the unemployment benefit or earning $ 1 m a year. The impact of taxing the vast array of goods and services purchased by ordinary people is to bring the tax 'system to bear much more heavily on those who can least affort to pay a higher proportion of their income in tax. A tax

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 771

system that moves towards higher indirect taxes is in office one need only look at what has happened

regressive. But the Treasurer wants to move to the movement in the tax burden in that time. r

towards a more regressive tax system, making it seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table

less equitable and making low and middle income which sets out the proportion of total tax collec

earners, who have paid a much higher proportion tions in 1975-76 and 1980-8 1 .

of their incomes in tax while his Government has been in office, particularly while he has been the Treasurer, pay much more. To bring in anything

Leave granted. The table read asfollows-

like a broad-based indirect tax to raise about

PROPORTION OF TOTAL TAX COLLECTIONS

$3,000m a year in revenue would have a dramatic impact on the tax burden of those people on low

1975-76 1980-8 1

and middle incomes. The Opposition totally re Income tax-

jects any such development now or in the future. Net PAYE

41.7

43.5

It would be utterly and totally inequitable and socially divisive.

Other Total-Individuals Companies

13.1

10.2

54.7

53.7

1 5.0

14.2

While this Government has been in office it has Withholding taxes

0.6

0.5

brought about a substantial disparity in the distri bution of income. This disparity is much worse

Total income tax

70.3

68.3

than it was when the Government took office. It Sales tax has done this through its income and taxation Crude oil levy

8.4

6.5

1 .6

9.9

policies and by cutting out various public sector programs which were of benefit to people on lower incomes. The Government, by making the

Other excise Customs duty
Other

1 2.3

8.6

6.2

5.8

1.3

0.8

disparity in the distribution of income and wealth much greater than it was when it came to office, is

Total indirect taxes

28.4

30.9

bringing about greater social divisiveness. A Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. The table

broad-based indirect tax, such as the Treasurer shows that the proportion of total tax paid by

would like to introduce, would exacerbate that pay-as-you-earn taxpayers has increased from

tendency towards social divisiveness which has so 4 1 .7 per cent to 43.5 per cent in the five years of

marked the Fraser Government and which will the Fraser Government. Pay-as-you-earn tax

continue to mark it while it remains in office pur payers are wage and salary earners who have no

suing its present policies. If a government is con chance of avoiding tax. They have their tax taken

cerned to achieve social cohesion and justice it away before they even receive their incomes.

must totally repudiate a tax move of this kind. I They are the easy ones to tax. This Government

am pleased that the majority in Cabinet has has made hay with them and ensured that they are

repudiated it to this time but I suspect that the paying a considerably higher proportion of their

reason it did so had nothing to do with social jus incomes in tax. As I said, the proportion of total

tice or the need to prevent social divisiveness. tax from pay-as-you-earn taxation has moved

Rather it had a great deal to do with the fact that from 41 .7 per cent to 43.5 per cent. By compari

Cabinet was frightened of the inflationary impact. son, other personal income tax payers, those with

That alone is the reason.

business, property or farm incomes, paid 1 3 . 1 per

Mr Howard-So it doesn't hurt low income earners. Good heavens above!

cent of total tax in 1 975-76 but only 1 0.2 per cent in 1 980-8 1 .

Mr WILLIS-I am not arguing for the

Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.

damned thing; I am opposing it. Of course it Mr WILLIS-Before the suspension of the sit

would have been ridiculous to bring in such a ting I was discussing a table which had been incor

scheme. It would have been ridiculous because of porated in Hansard and which showed the pro

the inflationary consequences but in addition to portion of total tax collections which were

those consequences, which are damaging to all of gathered under various types of taxes. I had noted

us, it would have been socially divisive because of that the proportion of the total tax paid by pay

the effect it would have had on the people on low as-you-earn taxpayers had increased from 4 1 . 7

and middle incomes. That is what the Treasurer is per cent t o 43.5 per cent over the period from

trying to achieve. We totally reject that kind of 1 975-76 to 1 980-8 1 . At the same time the pro

approach from the Treasurer. He does not give a portion of total tax derived from those whose

damn about achieving social cohesion and justice. earnings come from business, property or farm

To demonstrate the inequity of the system which income-the non-pay-as-you-earn taxpayers

this Government has introduced while it has been had dropped from 1 3 . 1 per cent in 1 975-76 to 1 0.2

772 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Taxation System

per cent in this current financial year. There is a marked difference in the record ' of tax levels extracted from those two groups. I think the difference in experience over that period is made doubly important by the fact that the income growth of the non-wage and salary earners has been far in excess of the income of the wage and salary earners, but despite that the proportion of total tax revenue which the non-wage and salary earners have been paying has dropped consider ably. This reflects both deliberate action by the Government and tax avoidance, which I will come to a little later. The table also shows that companies paid a reduced proportion of total taxes. The proportion in 1 975-76 was 1 5 per cent. It dropped this financial year to 1 4.2 per cent.
Let me now turn to indirect ta-xes, which the Treasurer would like to increase even further. In 1 975-76, 28.4 per cent of total taxes were gath ered through indirect taxes. In 1 980-8 1 the figure

has reached 30.9 per cent-an iilcrease of some 2t per cent. While the Fraser Government has been in office the income tax burden of wage and salary earners has increased considerably, yet in that time we have seen the tax bilrden of non-wage and salary earners and companies reduced. In direct taxes, which bear most heavily on low and middle income earners, have become much more important as a tax gathering device, the main reason being the crude oil levy which went from 1 .6 per cent of total tax revenues in 1 975-76 to 9.9 per cent in the current financial'year. That is an extraordinary increase. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which demonstrate the enormous impact that the increased tax burden has had on pay-as-you-earn taxpayers as a result of decisions of this Government over the period 1 975-76 to 1 980-SC
Leave granted. The tables read asfollows-

CHANGE IN INCOME TAX BURDEN RESULTING FROM THE FRASER GOVERNMENT'S CHANGES TO

,<

THE INCOME TAX SCHEDULES

Income* 1975-76

1980-81

Taxt 1 975-76

Proportion of income paid in tax

1980-81

1975-76

1980-8 1

Growth in money tax

Additional taxt
payable in 1 980-81

per annum

per week

$
6,000 7,000 8,000 9,000 1 0,000 1 2,000 1 5,000 20,000 25,000 50,000
6,000 7,000 8,000 9,000 1 0,000 1 2.000 1 5,000 20,000 25,000 50,000

$
9,852 1 1 ,494 1 3,136 14,778 1 6,420 19,704 24,630 32,840 4 1 ,050 82,100
9,852 1 1 ,494 1 3,136 14,778 1 6,420 1 9,704 24,630 32,840 4 1 ,050 82,100

$

$ per cent percent per cent

Taxpayer without dependants

1 ,020

1 ,860

1 7,0

1 8.9

82.4

1 ,370

2,385

1 9.6

20.7

74.1

1 ,720

2,9 1 0

21.5

22.2

69.2

2,070

3,436

23.0

23.3

66.0

2,420

3,961

24.2

24.1

63.7

3,320

5,357

27.7

27.2

61.3

4,670

7,623

31.1

31 .0

63.2

7,420

1 1 ,400

37.1

34.7

53.6

1 0,420

1 6,097

41.7

39.2

54.5

26,670

40,727

53.3

49.6

52.7

Taxpayer with dependent wife and two children

270

696

4.5

7. 1

1 57.7

620

1 ,221

8.9

1 0.6

96.9

970

1 ,746

1 2. 1

1 3.3

80.0

1 ,320

2,272

14.7

1 5.4

72. 1

1 ,670

2,797

1 6.7

1 7.0

67.'2

2,570

4, 1 93

2 1 .4

21.3

63.2

3,920

6,459

26.1

26.2

68.8

6,670

10,236

33.3

3 1 .2

53.5

9,670

1 4,933

38.7

36.4

54.4

25,920

39,563

51.8

48.2

52.6

$
+ 187 + 126
+ 92 + 44 -16 -99 -25 -788 - 1,026 -3,037
+ 256 + 195 + 158 + 103 + 49 -20 + 25 -690 -944 -2,956

$
+ 3.60 + 2.42 + 1.77 + 0.85 -0.3 1 - 1.89 -0.47 - 1 5 .02 - 19.73 -58.42
+ 4.93 + 3 .74 + 3.03 + 1.99 + 0.94 -0.38 + 0.50 - 1 3.26 -18.16 -56.84

* Incomes are assumed to grow by 46.6 per cent over the period 1975-76 to 1979-80 in line with the movement in average weekly earnings and by 12 per cent during 1 980-8 I -bringing the total earnings growth since 1975-76 to 64.2 per cent.
t Represents the additional tax payable in 1980-81 resulting from the Fraser Government's changes to the tax scales since 1 975-76.
* The increase in family allowances of $364 over the period is deducted from total tax to compensate for the change from tax
rebates for dependent children.

Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. The first table relates to a taxpayer without dependants and the other to a taxpayer with a dependant wife and two children. They show the various income

levels and the increase in the proportion of in come that is paid in tax. The tables show that a taxpayer without dependants earning under $ 1 5,000 a year is paying more of his income in tax

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 773

this year than he was in 1 975-76. For taxpayers with a dependent wife and two children the cut-off point is around $ 1 6,500 a year; all tax payers below that level are paying a higher pro portion of their income in tax than they were in 1 975-76. The last figure takes account of the fact that there has been a change in the system of pay ing assistance to those with families. The tax re bate has been abolished and family allowances increased.
The tables show a substantial increase in the tax burden of pay-as-you-earn taxpayers but those on low and middle income levels are suffer ing most. The lower the income, the greater has been the increase in the tax burden. This is a quite deplorable development. Let me now look at high income levels. These tables also show the re duction in the proportion of income tax paid by a taxpayer earning some $82,000 a year. He has received a tax cut of about $58 a week from this Government since 1 975-76. Those on very high income levels have been given substantial tax cuts while those on low and middle incomes have had to pay more, as a result of the deliberate action of this Government.
The effect on the overall tax system of the changes which were mentioned in the previous table has been to make the whole tax system more regressive. In other words, we have reached the stage now where to talk of a progressive tax sys tem is to talk of something which does not exist. As far as most taxpayers are concerned, we now have a regressive tax system. A substantial amount of work has been carried out on this sub ject by Mr Neil Warren, an economist. It was published by the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research in the third edition of the A ustralian Economic Review in 1 979. The article dealt with the 73 per cent of households which in 1 975-76 were in the middle range, that is, ignoring the bottom level and the top income levels. Taking into account income taxes and the impact of company taxes on people through increasing price levels, and considering also in direct taxes, it was found that the impact on households was proportional, that there was no progressiveness in the tax system as incomes went up. It was only at the very high income level that there was anything like a progressive tax.
Those figures related to 1 975-76. Since then the system has become much worse because we now have, as a result of the various decisions and inac tivity of this Government in respect of tax avoid ance, a regressive tax system. When one moves up the income range from the middle 75 per cent of taxpayers one finds that the proportion of income paid in total taxes is going down. So we have quite

the opposite of the progressive tax system we like to think we have, one which has regard for the ca pacity to pay; instead we have a system which taxes people less the higher their incomes. We be lieve that is a deplorable development. It will bring about great social upheaval if it is continued long enough. If the trends of the past years are continued an ever crushing burden will be imposed on those who can least afford to have an increased income tax burden placed upon them, whilst those on the higher levels will be increasingly able to escape their tax obligations. That is the system that we have reached at the present time. The Opposition finds it deplorable to think that a government was actually contem plating making that regressive system much worse. The Government would have done so, if the Treasurer had his way, by introducing a broad-based indirect tax and by cutting personal income tax. This would have made the system more regressive and, therefore, would have greatly exacerbated the trend under the present Government over the last few years.
I will give a little more detail as to why the sys tem has become so regressive. Firstly, there have been the deliberate changes to the rate scales to which I have already referred. Secondly, there is no doubt that tax avoidance has become rampant under this Government. Let me say at the outset that I am not accusing the Treasurer or the Government of doing nothing about tax avoid ance. In a previous debate the Treasurer accused me, after I had spoken, of accusing him of doing nothing about tax avoidance. This is not the Op position's point at all. We realise that a great deal oflegislation has been passed. In fact, over the last three years 300 pages of additional legislation has been passed to try to close off various tax avoid ance schemes. Our point is not that there has not been any activity by the Government, but that that activity has been ineffective; in fact, totally ineffectual. Over this period we have had an extraordinary explosion in tax avoidance.
The Treasurer has performed like a man who runs around a factory slapping himself on the be hind with a ruler all the time. He looks very busy and occupied but he is achieving absolutely nothing. The Treasurer is passing all this legis lation but is not stopping the flow of tax avoid ance schemes. As fast as he puts his finger in one hole in the dike, another two holes appear and more tax revenue flows through. The Opposition says that there is absolutely no doubt that that is the situation. Government members know that is the situation. It can be seen from the last annual report of the Commissioner of Taxation that the number of identified participants in tax avoidance

774 REPRESENTATIVES 12 March 1 98 1

Taxation System

schemes is 20 times higher-20 times higher than in the last year of the Labor Government. If that does not prove that there has been a tremen dous increase in tax avoidance while this Govern ment has been in office, what does?
Two years ago the Treasurer made a statement outside this House which was a considered state ment on tax and rather shorter and probably bet ter than the one he made in this place today. In that statement he did give us some information about the amount of money involved in tax avoid ance claims before the Commissioner of Taxation for the year 1 977-78. He found that some $ I ,400m of income was at stake and some $700m of tax revenue was at stake, assuming SOc in the dollar to be the average tax rate for the income involved which is not an unreasonable assumption. In this statement today which is a much longer one he could give us no such information. I challenge the Treasurer to give us that information now. I am quite sure that if he were to give that information for the financial year 1 979-80 the amount of tax revenue under challenge through tax avoidance would be much greater than the figure of $700m which he mentioned for the year 1 977-78. The fact that he has not mentioned it in this statement, which he paraded as a statement which would give us all the facts on tax, indicates how fright ened the Government is of this figure becoming public knowledge.
The reason tax avoidance has mushroomed is simply, as I have said, that the Government's case-by-case approach does not work. The Government knows that there are ways in which one can tackle tax avoidance which will work and which involve principally retrospectivity about which r will say a bit more later. Without taking that step and endorsing the principle of retrospec tive action on tax avoidance schemes there is no doubt whatever that the incidence of tax avoid ance will continue to get worse unless section 2 1 6, when it is finally brought in, is upheld fully by the High Court. On its past record one certainly would have to be a super-optimist to expect that to happen. The Government, apart from adopting the wrong approach to closing off various tax avoidance schemes, has also deliberately allowed the various tax avoidance schemes to continue. I have witnessed one of which I have told the Treasurer many times-the internal superannu ation schemes which he knows operate, which he knows are very extensive, which he knows are costing the Government an enormous amount of revenue as they have done for many years and about which nothing has been done.

The transfer tax decision of the High Court last year in the Commonwealth Aluminium Corpor ation Ltd case was not the start of the realisation by this Government that transfer pricing was costing this Government a lot of tax revenue and that transfer pricing by multinationals was lead ing to a bleeding-off of enormous amounts of potential tax revenue. The Government knew about this before the decision was handed down. That section has been fairly useless for years and certainly this Government has done nothing about it. Tax avoidance has become much worse under this Government-far worse than it was when Labor was in office. As a result there has been a great distortion to the equity of the tax sys tem. The system has become much more regress ive. As a result of the increase in the crude oil levy there has been an enormous increase in indirect taxation in the last few years. I have already men tioned the figures in relation to that. The crude oil levy resulted from a deliberate decision of the Government in 1 978 to implement in one big hit instead of gradually import parity pricing on Aus tralian crude oil and as a consequence get a large increase in tax revenue in a most regressive and in equitable way through this form of indirect tax ation on a basic commodity.
There is a long list of tax concessions to various lobby groups. While this Government has been in office it has made many tax concessions. In the last three years while this Treasurer has held his present portfolio, on our calculations some 38 tax concessions have been madel l to rural indus try, \ 0 to companies and 1 7 to others, in the main related to deductions on gifts and the film indus try. We are all aware of the extraordinary process that is going on in the film industry at the present time as a result of the latest round of tax con cessions for that industry. One of the concessions to the rural industry referred to today in the speech by the Treasurer was the allowing of pri mary producers to opt in or out of the income averaging provisions. These are rather extraordi nary provisions which allow farmers to get the best of both worlds. In fact, I wonder whether the Treasurer has been informed of the comments of his departmental head following the National Agricultural Outlook Conference in January when, after he had given his speech he was asked in a period of question time what he thought of the income averaging provisions as they currently operate and he said: 'Well, it is a case of heads, we win; and tails, all the other taxpayers lose'. Of course, that is exactly what it is because farmers opt in and out of the scheme as it suits them and this provision is there to make sure they benefit

Taxation System

12 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 775

either way. I think this is a fairly dubious kind of concession to be giving, to say the least.
Of all those concessions that have been men tioned only one relates to the wage and salary earners-the people in real need-and that is the spouse rebate. Even that concession can be ques tioned as to whether it is the best way to give assistance to people in real need, though certainly there is a significant problem in relation to the difference in the tax rates applying to single in come and two income families. This increase in the spouse rebate went some way to redressing that situation. Out of 38 tax concessions that is the only one that can be pointed to which applies to people in need. The tax concessions which have been given to various lobbies mainly have assisted the high income people and have made the present tax system even more regressive.
In respect of the investment allowance which is one tax concession which was brought in by this Government the Treasurer in his speech today simply assumed that this allowance increases in vestment. There is absolutely no study that has been brought forward by this Government at any time to give us any evidence whatever that the in vestment allowance brings about some substantial increase in investment. Even though it may bring in some investment, it is a cost-effective way of doing it. There is absolutely no study which shows that there has been this increase. In fact, the Crawford Committee on structural adjustment was very dubious indeed about any additions to investment flowing from the operation of the in vestment allowance. Yet this is the allowance which enables companies to reduce their tax bur den by hundreds of millions of dollars! In this year the amount of money involved is about $320m. Yet the Government has no real idea whether this concession is anything more than a handout to the companies. It has no idea of whether this con cession is bringing about increased investment. It is arguable that the enormous increase in invest ment which is taking place at the present time, although it is principally in the resource related area, would have occurred in any case if the in vestment allowance had not been operating.
There is a contradiction between the require ments of a good tax system as identified by the Treasurer and what he has in fact produced since he has been the Treasurer. One requirement of a good tax system which he has mentioned in his speech and on previous occasions is equity and fairness. I challenge those speakers who are to fol low me in this debate to demonstrate that this Government's actions on tax have in any way been equitable or fair. In any way that one wants to investigate them quite obviously they have

been highly inequitable and highly unfair in the way that I have already demonstrated. Quite ob viously there is an enormous gap between the rhetoric of fairness and equity and the perform ance of this Government and that of course would have been made even worse if a broad-based in direct tax had been brought in.
Another desirable element of a good tax system identified by the Treasurer is efficiency. Again there is this enormous gap between the desire for efficiency and the achievement of it. Quite obvi ously the tax system has become far less efficient under the present Treasurer and the present Government. This is demonstrated by the increas ing inability of this Government to collect tax from a large group of taxpayers-a growing group of taxpayers-because of tax avoidance. If there is this enormous bleeding-off of revenue through tax avoidance, which is getting worse year by year, how can anybody stand up and say that we have an efficient tax system or that the system is likely to become more efficient while these schemes continue to operate? The myriad of tax concessions to the powerful lobby groups also makes our tax system less efficient. Some of the concessions to which I have previously referred not only make the system less efficient but also they tend to exacerbate tax avoidance. They are a real breeding ground for it. One makes a taxation concession for a group with a particular intention in mind but various others will latch on to it and tax avoidance becomes rife, because a concession has been made. So the actions of the Government in respect of tax avoidance and tax concessions in regard to various favoured groups have not as sisted in making the system more efficient.
The Treasurer also says that the system should provide incentives to work and to earn more in come. Again, I shall challenge the Treasurer to produce any evidence whatever about the effect of tax on incentive to work. As I understand it, and I challenge Government supporters to pro duce evidence to the contrary, there is no evi dence to show what is the reaction of people to re ductions in taxation. Although on the one hand it may be argued that with reduced taxation people will work harder because they pay less to the Government in tax, on the other hand it is also ar guable that if people have a certain income in mind and the Government takes more of it in tax they will work a bit harder in order to get that end income after tax which they have in mind. As I understand it, various econometric studies have been done on this subject and none has come to any specific conclusion one way or the other. No one on the Government side has any evidence to produce in relation to that.

776 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Taxation System

It is amazing how the discussion of incentives always focuses on people with high incomes. No one on the Government side gives a damn about the incentive to work of someone on a low in come. What about the incentive to work of people on low and middle incomes who are paying much more of their income in tax this year than they paid in 1 975? A person on average weekly earn ings is today paying much more of his income in tax than he paid in 1 975. What about his incen tives? Why not have some regard to that? We do not talk about incentives in regard to low and middle income people. Incentives are usually used as an argument to give a tax concession to a favoured group. I repeat that there is little evi dence to show anything but that fact.
Something else that the Treasurer used to dis cuss, but has now ceased talking about, is sim plicity as a desirable attribute of a tax system. He has thrown that one aside no doubt because he re alises that the system has become anything but simple while he has been in charge of it. Indeed, it has become vastly more complex, again because of the extensive array of tax avoidance legislation, amounting to some 300 pages, which has been brought down in the last three years. Every time he brings down a tax Bill to close off a tax avoid ance scheme the complications of the Income Tax Assessment Act increase. Obviously, one cannot go on year after year using this kind of approach and adding hundreds of pages to the Act and claim that one is in favour of a simpler tax system. Obviously, every time that is done the system be comes infinitely more complex and fewer and fewer people understand it. The same goes for the vast array of tax concessions, all of which add to the complexity of the tax system and deny simplicity.
I turn now to the Government's tax philosophy. The Treasurer said that the Government, because it believes in a smaller public sector, is a low tax party. One can only say again that there is an amazing difference between the rhetoric and the performance of the Government. The reality is that the total proportion of income that is paid in tax has increased under this Government, and that tax as a proportion of gross domestic product is higher under it than it has ever been before. The Treasurer acknowledged that during his state ment. The size of the public sector also is greater now than it has ever been before. These are interesting developments under a government which claims that it is a low tax and low public sector government, as this Government has done many times, and indeed did again in the course of the Treasurer's speech today. The facts are quite the opposite.

This rise has been despite the substantial attempts of the Government to hide its con cessions by making them through the tax system rather than through government expenditure. A very annoying and worrying development which has taken place under this Government is that there has been an increase in this process of mak ing concessions to industry and various groups through tax concessions which represent hidden assistance rather than by way of government expenditure which shows up more clearly in the Budget Papers. This is something which runs totally against open government. Of course, this Government likes that because it means that if one does it by way of a tax concession rather than by way of government expenditure one gets the size of the public sector down and the tax level also. The Government is providing increasing levels of hidden assistance. It is also assistance which, in many cases, is very difficult to control. What better example of that could we have than what is happening in the film industry? A con cession brought in was supposed to cost $2m but we were told by the Treasurer a couple of days ago that it will cost $20m. That is an extraordi nary explosion in cost-something which could not have happened had it been part of an expendi ture program. I believe that is something which the House must take very seriously. There is no doubt that there is a deliberate attempt by this Government to channel further assistance through tax concessions rather than by way of increased expenditure.
I noticed particularly that the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) a few days ago said that he was looking closely at the restoration of tax rebates for children. To introduce tax re bates for children rather than increase family al lowances, or instead of having them, would re duce government expenditure. It would also mean an increase in tax concessions. The Government would be able to say: 'The taxes are down and the public sector is down'. All one is doing really is hiding the extent of the assistance, not changing anything-except that in that particular case one is denying the concession to people who do not have taxable incomes. That would be fairly a de plorable development. This whole process of giv ing assistance to industry through tax concessions rather than by way of open public expenditure programs goes totally against open government. That is a practice which this House and this Par liament must examine very seriously in the future.
It does not follow that because Labor believes that worthwhile public sector programs should be maintained and introduced, under a Labor government taxes on the great majority of people

Taxation System

12 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 777

would be higher. Labor is prepared to tax areas of substantial capacity to pay which this Govern ment is not prepared to tax. One example is a re sources tax. It has been much discussed in recent days and I do not intend to say a great deal about it. A resources tax is a tax on the super-profits of mining companies. It does not come into play until super-profits are made. Not to apply such a tax in a period when super-profits are being made, and will be made in much greater degree in the course of the next decade or two as the resources expansion gets underway, will be to forego enor mous amounts of tax revenue which should be paid to the Government for use by it on behalf of all the people, by way of either increased expendi ture or reduction of the tax burden generally. The minerals that are being exploited are owned by the Australian people. To allow them to be ripped off by multinationals and other companies so that they may make super-profits on what is nominally in the ownership of the people as a whole is an outrage-one that a Labor government would almost certainly not contemplate continuing.
Labor would also apply a resources tax to pet roleum to take over from the crude oil levy. We would apply it to Fortescue, the new oil field op eration which is to enjoy tax free privileges under this Government. Not to apply a crude oil levy to Fortesque is to forego, at current oil prices over the 1 0-year life of that field, some $3.5 billion in tax revenue. As oil prices increase that amount will increase also. To give away such extraordi nary amounts of revenue to the shareholders of Esso and BHP at the expense of the Australian taxpayer is unbelievable on the part of the Government which claims to be in favour of lower taxes for the Australian people.
The Treasurer said that a resources tax would have disincentive effects on investment. He has no evidence for saying that. Resource taxes operate in other countries without preventing programs for resource development from going ahead. Little Papua New Guinea, an undeveloped country to our north, is able to apply a resource rent tax to two major projects. The projects have gone ahead with beneficial results for the people of Papua New Guinea-simply because that country has such a tax system operating. Many other countries also are able to introduce such a tax. It is absurd to say that such a tax here would operate as a disincentive to development. It should come into operation only when profits reach a level which would have induced the in vestment in the first place.
For the Treasurer to argue also, as he did in his speech today, that our foreign investment guidelines which require a 50 per cent Australian

equity in all new projects mean that we do not have to have such a tax is an utterly ludicrous ar gument. It means that he is saying: Because some Australians are going to share in the profits from these resource development programs the rest of us do not have to worry too much. We do not accept that proposition. The vast majority of Aus tralians will not benefit in that way. It is only re cently that the Government has started to im plement fully its foreign investment guidelines and to insist on 50 per cent Australian equity, so many projects in operation do not have 50 per cent investment from Australia.
We have again the Government's failure vigorously to attack tax avoidance. I have explained exactly what I mean by that: I do not mean that there has been no action but that the action taken has been ineffective. The Australian Labor Party has produced a long list of anti-tax avoidance proposals which would effectively close off tax avoidance. They mainly involve retrospective application of legislation, which the Treasurer knows would be effective and would stop the absurdity of having to bring in heaps of legislation every session in order to block off par ticular schemes. Once that legislation is applied retrospectively all people will know that there is no point in getting into a tax avoidance scheme because sooner or later the Government will close it off and backdate that closure to when it first operated. No benefit will be gained from it. The people concerned will have to pay the tax avoid ance consultant's fee as well, and they will be worse off. So retrospectivity is the ultimate answer. To rely on the hope that the High Court may support section 260 is to rely on a pretty thin reed indeed.
In any case the Treasurer has been over two years bringing in section 260. He has been talking about doing so since the middle of 1 979 but we still have not seen it. So it is something which is yet to arrive. During those two years there has been an enormous amount of tax lost through tax avoidance. The process of tax avoidance has be come much worse. There has also been a great list of unnecessary tax concessions which have been made and which a Labor government would most certainly not allow to continue in the future. We would close off those tax concessions which we felt were useless.
Mr Howard-Would you name some of them? Mr WILLIS-I will nominate the investment allowance as o n e , which we previously nominated. Mr Howard-It would be good for small busi ness, wouldn't it?

778 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 198 1

Taxation System

Mr WILLIS-If the Treasurer had been in the chamber before he would have heard what I had to say about the investment allowance. He came into the chamber only five minutes ago. If he had paid me the courtesy of being here earlier he would have heard what I had to say about it. As I was saying, the investment allowance has never been shown by the Treasurer to be of any benefit at all to investment. He has never produced any evidence to show that it would have any effect on increasing investment. In the main it must be seen as a handout to business which is unnecessary and which would not be continued by a Labor govern ment. The Government has so many of these handouts that it must place a large tax impost on wage and salary earners, thus increasing their bur den so extraordinarily.
Finally, what we see is this: The Treasurer's statement today gives no hope of tax concessions to the people of Australia and to the wage and sal ary earners in particular who have borne enor mous increases in their taxes both by way of pay as-you-earn tax and indirect tax under this Government. The only hope that this Treasurer gives them of tax cuts in the future is if he can slash the public sector expenditure programs. He would like to hack into community beneficial programs, such as health, education and welfare. If we are going to get tax concessions paid for by cuts in areas such as these-they are essential in a decent society-I do not think that those cuts will be beneficial to the Australian people as a whole or that they will improve their living standards.
Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (8.34) The honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) started offhis speech at a reasonable pace, but before long he got involved again in those hang-ups that we hear so often from him and other members of the Australian Labor Party. The logic in his speech disappeared rapidly. We even heard him say that higher taxes will make people work harder. That is apparently the sort of thing--
Mr Willis-I did not say that. Mr SAINSBURY-The honourable member did say that. He said that he challenged us in sug gesting that there is no incentive with higher taxes for people to work harder. Mr Willis-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I have been grossly misrepresented by the honourable member for Eden-Monaro. He knows exactly what I said. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! That is not a point of order. The honourable member can seek to make a personal explanation at a later hour.

Mr SAINSBURY-If the honourable member for Gellibrand says, as he did in that speech, that lower taxes do not make people work harder, he must mean that higher taxes will. That is exactly what he said. Honourable members on this side of the House heard it. What is more, we will make sure that the honourable member remembers having said that because we will use that against him time and again, just as we used a number of other things he has said in the past, such as his statement a couple of years ago about the Aus tralian people having to get used to paying higher taxes to support an ever growing public sector. He keeps saying that and this is what the Australian people know about the Australian Labor Party that it is a high tax party and that it still has mass ive hang-ups about simple, ordinary Australians making profits and investing them for their own futures. The Labor Party always sees things in static terms and it was a static speech made by the honourable member for Gellibrand. The Labor Party does not see incentives in the system as being able to achieve higher production. Unless there is tax system-I hope I have time to talk about this a little more later-that says to people 'If you get out and work, you will get some re ward', the country will go backwards, as has hap pened in Britain and Sweden.
So many things in the speech made by the honourable member for Gellibrand annoyed me. He has a shocking memory about the concessions that were made available to individuals in Australia. He has a shocking memory about the terrible burden of the deficit which we have had to battle with-a deficit which has made it very difficult to offer further tax concessions. In that context the concessions that we have been able to offer over the past five years in getting that deficit down have been almost miraculous.
I am not terribly pleased with the statement that the Treasurer made today, for a number of reasons. This is not in any way a criticism of the Treasurer but more a criticism of our system. It is a terrible admission that he had to make today. When talking about the problems in perhaps having a different tax mix and the problems of considering an increase in indirect tax-that is, discretionary taxes as against non-discretionary taxes-he said:
There was the disturbing possibility that the Arbitration Commission could not be pursuaded to discount effectively for the price effects of a shift towards greater reliance on in direct taxation.
To me it is very frustrating that we live in a country where we just cannot trust the arbitration system to think sensibly. Apparently we cannot trust the judges to see that a genuine move by a

Taxation System

1 2 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 779

government-a move which is genuinely put for ward to increase the incentives and scope for choice by Australian people-is not misconstrued and that they do not just reload an increase in dis cretionary taxes through the consumer price index on to wages. One of the frustrating things about the speech is to come again to that realis ation. Without saying very much more about the mix between direct and indirect taxes it is obvious that there is scope for a different mix. It is obvious for a number of reasons that I hope I can mention later.
The reference again by the Treasurer, as he was bound to do, to the fact that the artificial schemes that have been springing up in recent times-they were springing up very strongly I might say in the time that the Labor government was in power as well as during our own term in power-continue to proliferate is also frustrating. People use the law in many ways very selfishly. I hope that the Treasurer will be successful in reforming section 260 and section 1 36. Really it is wrong in our sys tem if the people who, in the sense of the law, are meant to be paying taxes are not.
It is also frustrating to read the speech and to realise again that many Australian people perhaps do not understand simply arithmetic. One of the most basic bits of arithmetic when it comes to government is that we either have to balance the books or run a deficit. If we run a deficit we are in big trouble for a number of reasons. I believe people in Australia are moving towards the view that if they want tax reductions their programs will have to be cut back. I just wish that people would understand that a little better. As one goes around one's electorate and hears calls for in creases in expenditure in pretty well every area one can imagine, it is still very difficult to explain to people that if they want expenditure programs expanded they will have to pay more tax for those programs. Of course, the Labor Party's answer to that is that one just gets at people who make profits or super-profits, or somehow miraculously one gets at people who--
Dr Cass-That is right; super-profits-a lot more than they need to survive.
Mr SAINSBURY-That is right. The Labor Party would get at anybody who wanted to take a risk. It expects to squeeze the tax avoiders to the extent of raising a major proportion of taxation. Any figures on this amount that could be raised from this method that I have ever seen come out of the Treasury-which after all looks at these things face to face-appear to be something of the order of $ 1 ,OOOm. In terms of the Government's overall expenditure in Australia of wen over

$30,000m I do not see that that $ l ,OOOm will solve very many problems. It might cause a lot of frus tration. My summation of the total statement is that some very sensible changes remain in the too hard basket-a too hard basket largely created by our own system. I hope that this is not the last definitive statement on taxation that we will hear in the next two or three years. I hope that the too hard basket can be got around somehow. I am cer tain that our present taxation system, both in size and structure, is not the best that we could have.
The honourable member for Gellibrand stated that the person in the pay-as-you-earn taxation system is paying an abnormally high amount of taxation, which is desperately bad. I agree. In creases in PAYE taxation have bounded ahead in recent years and it is the person in the middle in Australia-who win save just enough to' get mov ing in some sort of business, who wants some incentive to use the ingenuity that is abounding in this country-who really is bearing too much of the tax burden. It is for that reason that I said that a basic change in the mix towards indirect tax ation with some lessening of personal taxation, especially in the PAYE area, is absolutely essen tial. The honourable member for Gellibrand said that that view is not shared by the Australian Labor Party.
The Treasurer said that taxation is not just an isolated topic. It bears on inflation policy, re sources policy, social policies, the redistribution ethic which we have in this country, and on allo cation policies. All these things are mixed up somewhere in the taxation area. As the Treasurer said, something approaching one-third of our total gross national product is tied up in taxation-a massive proportion. When one con siders that roughly 30 per cent of the gross national product is going in tax to the Govern ment the amount is given some perspective. That figure approaches four times the value of our total rural production. An honourable members know that rural production alone is quite massive.
The mix and the vast possibilities in our tax ation system give scope to effect the whole distri bution of income. Distribution effects have to be taken into account by any government. Of course, some of those issues were canvassed. I said earlier that J hope this statement is not the end of the story. I am not sure why the honourable member for Gellibrand agreed with this proposal in the light of what he said in his speech, but the taxation mix really affects efficiency through a number of considerations-the distribution effect, how much tax should be taken from profits and wages and what share the Government should have. Another cross reference to distribution is the

780 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Taxation System

question o f how much tax should b e paid by people in the work force and people not in the work, force. How much tax should we ask inves tors to pay and how much should we ask . con sumers to pay? As with anything in our market system, a change in one area has an effect on people in many other areas. That distribution effect of .taxation really affects the overall efficiency of the country.
We have to ask ourselves continuously about the incentive to produce. I refer again to the size of the tax burden. It is probably the greatest disin centive to produce, despite what the honourable member for Gellibrand said; that there is no evi dence to suggest that higher taxes will make people work any less hard. If honourable members go around the bush electorates to talk to a few shearers they will find thatthese people are just not prepared to work quite as hard any more. Maybe people in my electorate are not the same as people in Melbourne, but I believe that they are. When a government looks at the tax system it has to look at the incentives to invest. Many of us are now beginning to understand that Australians really ought to own more of Australia's resources. Of course, the policies of the Labor Party militate against that possibility. The Labor Party does not want people to make profits and to save. Of course, if our vast resources are developed by other people for the benefit of Australia we are the people to blame.
The taxation system has a great effect through its sheer psychology, the expectations of people. The get up and go of this country depends on an expectation of getting some reward for effort. I have said already, having heard the statement of the Treasurer and realising some of his frus trations, that our present stand on matters of tax ation just is not good enough. I want to raise one other matter with which I basically disagree and which I believe needs to be corrected. The Treasurer, on page 2 of his statement, said:
Unless taxation changes are consistent with and achievable within the existing framework they will frustrate rather than serve the Government's economic objectives.
I suggest that instead of using the word 'existing' we should talk about a desired economic frame work. This Liberal coalition Government has a desire that Australian people grow in affluence and that disadvantaged people reap benefits in a country where incentive is a very obvious fact of life. Again, the taxation system comes very much into that.
' I regard a resources tax as some sort of an option provided it is predictable and not in a sense a penalty for risk taking. Somehow it should in volve some purchase price for what people might

regard as a national windfall. If we ever consider a . resources tax I hope that i t will be set i n a com petitive market framework. I have not the time to discuss that matter but I want to repeat that overlying all that I have said is the argument that we must have less tax. The propensity to increase Government equates with the propensity to inter fere more in our lives through economic control and regulation. Of course those are the goals of the socialists who always think that they know better than we do.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (8 .49)-The honour able member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) had some reasonable comments to make even though he made some derogatory and unjustified statements about what I consider to be a concise and realistic evaluation of the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) . Something he said which was very reasonable and with which I agree was that he was not terribly pleased about the statement made today by the Treasurer. All honourable members on this side of the House share that lack of pleasure. Once the people of Australia realise what is behind that bland, window-dressing statement they likewise will agree. The Government's tax options are running out quickly. The Treasurer himself has already stated at great length that the Government said no to a resources tax, to a retail turnover tax and to a value added tax. The Treasurer indicated also that revenue returned from the oil parity pricing policy or petrol tax has peaked and will fall.
No one likes tax, but no one wants the anarchy which would surely prevail if the government simply stopped spending its collected revenues on hospitals, schools, roads, airports and the multi tude of community services we expect our govern ment to provide. Our taxable resources are finite. This Government has even taxed our patience to the limit, and if these tax options are closed we must ask ourselves: 'Where will the money come from to finance hospitals, schools, et cetera? ' There is no confusion on this side of the House about where the money should come from. OUf nation's own resources are our people's birthright. We have no qualms about a resource rental tax levied on mostly foreign mineral development companies which are deriving extensive profits from our tesource wealth. Such a tax is an inevi tability. The Treasurer knows it, the Treasury knows it and, from what the honourable member for Eden-Monaro said, honourable members on the Government back bench also know it.
What are the alternatives? The Government could I suppose, follow the example of one of the czars of Russia and levy a peasant soul tax under

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 78 1

whichpeasants became mere items on the tax roll, sold or exchanged according to the needs or whims of their masters. The adoption of such a system is not too far off, judging from some of the policies of the Government. We could take a leaf out of King George II's book and impose a win dow tax. Of course, these are not serious sugges tions. But then, there are no serious alternatives to the options which the Government has already considered and rejected.
The indirect tax alternative which shimmers ominously on the horizon of the Government's options-deny it though the Treasurer may; in fact 1 think he protests too much-is, as the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) pointed out, entirely unacceptable in that it hits once again at the lower income earner. The Treasurer made a lot of huff and puff justifying the high incidence of tax avoidance. He tried to convince us that it was being dealt with. The Bar wick High Court pulled the rug out from under the Government when it brought down its ruling last year on section 260 of the Income Tax Assess ment Act and emasculated the limited measures taken to reduce tax avoidance. That is a fact.
On the expenditure side of the ledger, the options are equally restricted. Areas such as social security, health, education, arts, housing and transport have been cut to the bone and further reductions cannot under any circumstances be countenanced by the public nor surely by members of the Government's back bench. Other expenditure items, principally defence, are already heavily committed. The hard options which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) so enthusiastically espoused at the outset of his period in office are becoming softer and softer. The fact is that the Government is tied to the Prime Minister's medieval Micawber monetarism. I will explain that. Government economic policy is summed up in the words of the Dickens' character, Thomas Micawber who said--
Mr Barry Jones-Wilkins Micawber. Mrs DARLING-I thank the honourable member. Wilkins Micawber said:
Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nine teen nineteen six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pounds ought and six, re sult misery.
Of course, our national Budgets are in the thou sands of millions of dollars, but the quaint over simplified notion of balanced budgets is as close to the heart of this Prime Minister as it was to that amazing nineteenth century character of fiction. That is where balanced national budgets belong-in fiction and back in the nineteenth cen tury. The concept is fine for domestic budgets, as

well I know, but it has no place in a national par liament when we are dealing with a national budget.
The Government has an oversimplified notion which is easy to sell to the public. Anyone who purports to be an economist knows that a planned deficit can have inflationary, deflationary or neu tral effects of the economy. An assessment of a Budget's effect can be made only after consider ation is given to the proposed growth rates of expenditure and revenue, the state of the econ omy compared with its full capacity, the way in which the deficit arises through taxation cuts, through expenditure increases, et cetera, and the way in which the Budget deficit is -financed. The balanced budget is the economic strait-jacket in which the Prime Minister has been placed by his own addiction to ideological dogma. I would not mind if he alone were a prisoner of his own narrow-minded convictions, but what bothers me is that we are all economic hostages with him.
We witnessed today the staying power of the Treasurer as he proceeded doggedly to justify his Government's act of juggling the tax basket to balance the Government's income revenue with its outgoing expenditure without actually doing or achieving anything. The Treasurer's speech was made up of pages of rhetoric and self-justification. One can look right through the speech for some new plan or a new way of dealing with taxation but there is nothing there. The speech was long and bland, but it amounted to nothing. The Prime Minister may have appreciated his act, but we were not amused. The Government's repeated claim that it is concerned about reducing income taxes is wearing thin. This year the Treasurer is budgeting for total tax revenue of approximately $32m-twice that taken in the Budget brought down by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) when he was Treasurer five years ago.
Australians have paid more tax in the last five years under the Fraser Government than the joint total of all taxes collected in the previous 1 2 years by the Menzies Government, the Holt Govern ment, the Gorton Government, the McMahon Government and the Whitlam Government. That is a fact. Honourable members opposite are not very happy to hear that. As the Leader of the Op position stated repeatedly during the election campaign last year, Australians in 1 2 months have paid more in just one tax-the petrol tax-than all Australians paid in total income tax only 1 0 years ago. The sympathy the Government professes that it has for the plight of wage earners is patently shallow when we take into account the fact that since the Government took office taxes paid by those receiving income from a business,

782 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Taxation System

property pr profession have risen by less than half and rationalisation of this Government's policy

of the taxation rises suffered by wage and salary making processes that it should use the carrot of

earners. There was a 3 1 per cent increase for the tax avoidance as part of its arts policy. It would

former contrasted to a 73 per cent increase for not be the first time that the Government has

pay-as-you-earn taxpayers. In the same period the stooped to conquer. There can be no justice, no

income of non-PAYE taxpayers increased almost equity in our taxation system without enforcing

twice as fast as that of wage and salary earners. the responsibility of our wealthier citizens and

The Government does not have the interests of companies to contribute their share to the nation's

wage and salary earners at heart.

general revenue. For those on the top end of the

The outstanding feature of income tax over the last five years is an abrogation of responsibility by the highest income earners in this country to pay taxes. In a country where businesses are going bankrupt at an alarming record rate, one business 'is booming-the tax avoidance business and it is big business indeed. The Treasurer has used words to deal with this problem. All that the honourable gentleman said when he gave us his marvellous epistle was that he realised that the problem existed, that many Bills had been passed and that much had been done. The fact is that tax avoid

income scale income tax is now almost voluntary. It seems that only the ones \Vith conscience pay. The taxation debate is not just an economic de bate; it is a moral one. Taxation is more than the collection of government revenue to finance pub lic works. Certain principles are acknowledged. But the fundamental assumption of governments around the world is that in order to finance government programs they should draw most heavily on the resources of those most able to pay-the wealthy, the big businesses, the big companies.

ance still remains. Professor Russell Mathews, a

leading authority in the tax field, estimates that tax avoidance costs us about $3 billion a year. It has been five years since the rot set in. Still the Government refuses to tackle it head on.

Just as the most significant development in tax ation over the past five years has been the ex plosion of tax avoidance-it has increased by 1 2,000 per cent over five years-the most sig

Mr Howard-That is a very out-of-date speech. Do you know when he made that speech?

nificant response of the Government has been to bear down even more heavily on wage earners, those least able to pay, to compensate for the loss

Mrs DARLING-That may be an outdated quote, but this speech is not. What the Treasurer said is a most outdated piece of window dressing. His speech was utterly bland and it amounted to nothing. As my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand noted, hundreds of pages of tax avoidance legislation have been processed by the Parliament. It is well past the time when the boom should be lowered on tax avoidance. Every dollar avoided is another dollar that must be squeezed out of wage and salary earners. Not only has that challenge to end avoidance not been made, but also this Government has incorporated tax avoid ance as part of its policy in other areas of govern ment concern.

in revenue. It has done that by increasing indirect taxation. The Treasurer in his statement put every possible reason why we should not go ahead with indirect taxation. But it is obvious that this is an option that he is leaving open. Over past years we have had a number of income tax surcharges introduced in Budgets, and in mini-Budgets. These surcharges have hit wage earners because it is wage earners, people on fixed incomes, who are the sitting ducks for the Commissioner of Tax ation. Wage earners cannot avail themselves of the techniques of tax avoidance-tax avoidance trusts, for example, which despite some Govern ment measures are still a means of evading tax for very high income earners with property or invest ment income. A person with an income of

The final, lasting tribute of the recently de $ 1 00,000 can reduce his taxation by about

parted Minister for Home Affairs and High Court $ 1 6,000 through a trust set up to split the income

aspirant was the so-called tax incentive scheme with his wife and two children. The Government's

designed to increase investment in Australia's film failure to bite the bullet on trusts last year will

industry. That has become a real lurk. No wonder cost it an estimated $50m in tax revenue for the

everyone is trying to buy into the film industry. current financial year. If the Treasurer is on the

The Government has made it so easy to do so. level in wanting to assist the ordinary middle and

People who put $ 1 00,000 into a film can claim lower income earner, he should follow through

$ 1 50,000 as a tax deduction. If they make a profit enthusiastically and energetically in clamping

over and above their investment they have to put down on tax avoidance. He cannot mean what he

down only half of the profit made for taxation says. Wage earners cannot avail themselves of the

purposes. It is a fascinating insight into the logic lurks used by companies to avoid tax-overseas

Taxation System

1 2 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 783

tax havens, transfer pricing and contrived internal superannuation funds, for example.
It is no good for the Government to shed tears of regret over revenue which has slipped through the tax man's net. These avoidance schemes are well known to the Government and it need only announce unilaterally that henceforth highly con trived avoidance schemes of this nature will be unlawful, subject to the provisions of amending legislation to be brought in at a later date. That is something that the Treasurer could do. If there are reasonable members on the other side of the House, some back benchers who really want something done-it has been indicated to me that there are-they will consider this and consider the Opposition's recommended options of a resource tax and a clamping down on tax avoidance.
We on this side of the House acknowledge that retrospectivity should be applied only as a last re sort and on an extremely selective basis. Retrospectivity is the Treasurer's greatest weapon. If he refuses to use it, he is impotent. Fully retrospective anti-avoidance legislation would not extend to the penal provision in the In come Tax Assessment Act. It can only operate to deny taxpayers benefits they would otherwise de rive from the particular schemes in question. These are exceptional circumstances which war rant and demand exceptional measures. Retrospectivity is exceptional. The blatant adver tising of avoidance that occurs in such journals as the A ustralian Financial Review and the National Times is an affront to all taxpaying, law-abiding wage earners. Tax avoidance is theft.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (9.4)-1 rise in this debate to draw the Opposition's attention to the fact that the statement made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) was never intended to be a mini-Budget or an indication of what tax reform was in store for Australia. I wish to lay down in very real terms, stark terms, what has been hap pening with the tax system and, more import antly, draw to our attention the various statistics which J believe have not been available to this Parliament before. I refer to the tables at the back of the Minister's statement, particularly table l. Whilst it is all very well for people to say that we are overtaxed just because somebody runs a special article to that effect in a newspaper, the fact is, as shown by table I, that Australia is one of

the least taxed member countries of the Organis ation for Economic Co-operation and Develop ment. That does not, of course, say that the sys tem is perfect. In fact, anybody on the Government side will be happy to make a contri bution to this debate if he is given the opportunity. That is just one of the oversights of the Opposition.
In fact, of the two contributions that I have heard so far the first, that by the Opposition spokesman on finance and the Treasury the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) , would indicate that the Australian Labor Party is as full of financial illiterates now as it was be tween 1 972 and 1 975. Many of the criticisms that are being made now are just not based on recent events. I want to point to the area of tax avoid ance. The Opposition can now tell us what we could do with section 260 of the I ncome Tax Assessment Act. It can now tell us what might happen if there is retrospectivity. What did the then Opposition do between 1 972 and 1 975? Per haps this is not the type of debate in which we should draw the Opposition's attention to this matter, but I think it is necessary that we do. The Opposition had obvious evidence of the Curran scheme. The Treasurer of the day-I believe it was Mr Crean-mentioned that the Government was going to move against it. Not only' did that Government not move against it, but it also did nothing about section 260 and tax avoidance gen erally. It was only in 1 977-
Mr Milton-It was not an industry in those days,
Mr BRAITHWAITE-It is an industry that started in the years between 1972 and 1975. I think the Opposition ought to take this into account. If there is an industry-nobody is deny ing it-it started in the years between 1972 and 1 975. The records will show why. That was when the massive increase to salary and wage earners in this country took place. That was under a Labor Government that was supposed-but never did-to take care of the workers of the country. I suggest that the Opposition should get its act more into gear. We might hear something more con structive from the following Opposition speakers than we have heard from those who have already spoken.
This statement is a springboard from which members of the Government parties-if we are the only ones to make a sensible contribution to this debate-can air their schemes. I do not want to recapitulate everything that was said. I mention the resource tax, which is one of the hardy annuals of the Labor Party. It says that

784 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Taxation System

companies, particularly multinationals, are bleed ing the country of income. I can only give the facts and figures on one company that operates fairly extensively in Queensland. These indicate that its net profit for two years trading was one half ot' what the Queensland Government and the Aus tralian Government took out of that company in the way of royalties and various taxes. In other words, if the multinational concerned had not been in operation both the State and the Com monwealth would have been denied in the vicinity of $250m a year over the last two years. Do not talk to me about resource taxes. If there is not something of a resource tax in royalty payments, rail freight, payroll tax and branch profits tax I would be very surprised. In fact, the State and Federal Government share is such that the pro prietors of developing minefields at times wonder about their viability within the industry. The Labor Government had its opportunity between 1 972 and 1 975, but it did not take it. Yet Oppo sition members now come into this House and talk about what the present Government should be doing.
T want to talk about future policy and expound a few thoughts of my own about indirect taxation. Indirect taxation in any of its forms hides not only the amount of tax payable by the public but also many of the anomalies that are within those taxes. I mention one anomaly that has existed for the last 20 years. Sales tax on freight imposes a pen alty particularly on people living in capital cities and manufacturing areas. Some people might say that it is only a small thing but if that anomaly cannot be removed from the sales tax area I suggest that the anomaly will be a lot greater under other forms of indirect taxation, particu larly retail turnover tax and value added tax.
In that respect, if the tax were more widespread than the wholesale tax and if it were applied to most items, there would be an anomaly not only in relation to freight but also in relation to the vari ous handling charges in the country. Also there would be an anomaly in relation to the higher profit margin which the country businessman would strive to obtain because of a limited number of consumers. An article that might cost $ 1 00 in a capital city would be more likely to cost up to $ 1 20 to $ 1 50 in the country as a result of these charges. Any percentage of tax imposed on that item would mean that people in country Australia would pay a lot more than those in the capital cities. If we look at indirect taxes in the future we must remove this anomaly completely from a retail turnover tax. I suggest to the Treasurer, who is at the table, that perhaps we should put on our collective thinking caps in order

to remove that one small anomaly which exists at the moment in the Sales Tax Act.
It has been said that wage and salary earners have received no consideration from this Govern ment. They have received more consideration in the way of lighter taxes than they did when the Labor Government was in office between 1 972 and 1 975. I will just give an indication of that. Although tax indexation has not gone as far as some of us would have liked-it has not been complete--there has been some tax indexation. Between the years 1 972 to 1 975 the Labor Government, given that option, did not take it up. There has been relief and it has been given mainly to those people in the form of the spouse rebate allowance. Also the change from the taxation al lowance for dependent children to the family al lowance, I think, has been ofgreat benefit to those people on smaller incomes who were previouslydenied the advantage of a tax deduction for de pendants. Wage and salary earners have received consideration but I suggest that they are the people who should be receiving more consider ation, not so much from the zero ceilings or the tax indexation aspect, but in relation to the rate of tax in the dollar on the incomes that they might eventually aspire to. I speak with some authority in this area.
All honourable members who were in the Par liament in July and August of last year will recall the strike in relation to taxation by workers employed at the Bowen coal basin in central Queensland. The strike started out on the basis that they would not pay an extra tax on the houses which they rented. Effectively, they said: 'We do not deny that we are high income earners but we want the rest of Australia to know that we are also high taxpayers'. Such workers do not have the benefit, being residents of one industry towns, of having a working spouse, halving their incomes and receiving benefits in that way. There is a very real lesson to be learned from that tax re volt for all Australians. I understand that by the time the strike had ended the sympathy of Aus tralians was with the miners for that one reason alone. They realised that if a bonus is to be given in the form of a tax reduction it was time we started with the middle and high income earners and not maintain our effectiveness on behalf of the lower income earners.
I would go so far as to say that tax indexation, when it was introduced, was hailed as a great achievement. I must say that I support it in this House. I think now it is too much of a bind for any government or any Treasurer at Budget time to be forced into a situation of giving that concession before consideration is given to the overall

Taxation System

1 2 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 785

ramifications of where other benefits might be given. I suggest that tax indexation be dropped from our taxing policies and be replaced each Budget by an effective policy that allows the Government to structure its tax rates in order to achieve the best result-to structure them in such a way that we give a positive incentive to middle and high income earners instead of the maintain ing the positive disincentive that exists at the mo ment. I think we should be giving a bonus to those taxpayers who are earning higher incomes. It has been said, I think by George Bernard Shaw-I am glad that the honourable for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) is not in the chamber because he would probably correct me on this--
Mr Bradl1eld-He is in the chamber. Mr BRAITHWAITE-He will probably pick me up on it. George Bernard Shaw said that any government that sets out to rob Peter to pay Paul will always be guaranteed of the support of Paul. I think that is probably an area in which our tax ation policy fails. That statement must have been right because the honourable member for Lalor did not correct it. It is a very topical matter. Over the last ten years the Pauls-that is, the beneficiaries from welfare in one form or another-have increased by 1 22 per cent. In the same period there has been an increase of 25 per cent in the number of taxpayers. The Peters in this Australian nation are becoming fewer, but the number of Pauls is becoming greater. It is very important to consider-I think it is one of the most critical points we should be look ing at as a government as far as future taxation and policy is concerned-how does the nation of Australia in the 1 990s maintain its funding to those people who have a priority call on our funds; that is, the old age pensioners. How do we maintain the momentum and the equity to them in the 1 990s if the number of wel fare recipients, particularly the old age pen sioners, is increasing and the number of taxpayers is decreasing, optionally or otherwise? The figures show that tax avoidance, as has been said in the statement, is a fairly well estab lished industry. I maintain that it started during the years of the Labor Government. One startling statistic shows that the people who are dropping out of the income scales are those in the top in come bracket. The figures-I took them out for the three years from 1 976 to 1 979; it is a three year comparison-indicate to me that the number of persons who earned $32,000 or more, the high income people of Australia, actually halved in that period. Not only did their numbers halve but

also they contributed one-half of the total per sonal tax collected. It is important that we recog nise that and ask: 'What will we do in the future? '
The final Hancock report was tabled in this House over two years ago. It is in this direction that I want to draw the attention of honourable members. I think our income tax structure should be separated completely from the requirement to fund in the current year the old age pension. I know that the Government has decided that a national superannuation scheme may not be the right cause for Australia to follow. 1 believe that the introduction of a national pension scheme is. Such a scheme can be introduced in such a way that the private insurers can participate and that it can keep open some of the doors. Some doors are being closed at the moment. The doors that are being closed, I believe, are those involving our change from an asset test to an income test which prevents us in many ways from disallowing pen sions to people who are entitled to receive them on an income basis but not on an assets basis. We have eliminated the gift tax from the area of tax collection, thereby allowing people at 65 years of age to transfer superannuation to somebody else by way of a gift and still be eligible to receive the pension.
Those are two areas, I suggest, that the Govern ment might look at: Firstly, our future policy on a national pension scheme for old age pensioners and, secondly, the small anomaly in the Sales Tax Acts. If that matter of sales tax can be rectified my attitude to indirect tax would be considerably different from what it is at the moment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (9. 19)-1 am grateful to have the opportunity to take part in some of these late night debates in this House. Peter and Paul economics is quite a new subject matter for debate. More clearly, it should be Peter Pan economics, which is what we can expect from the plough boys. The honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) realises, as does little Ronnie, that government spending is one of the causes of the need for higher taxes. That is ob vious. It is so basic that even he can appreciate it. It seems to me that there his intellectual ability reaches its limit. We are told that one of the main causes of the need for this additional tax, is the growth in government, in other words, big govern ment. The record over the last 10 years indicates that the biggest growth in government has been in the Liberal States. It was 36 per cent in Western Australia, 27 per cent in Queensland, 21 per cent

786 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Taxation System

in New South Wales and less in South Australia. In that time the growth in the Federal Govern ment was about 1 8 per cent. Clearly the Liberals are the supporters of big government. The Liberal States have had a proliferation of semi government authorities, Western Australia being the record holder.
It is clear-Government members are quite right about this-that a government cannot cut taxes unless it cuts government spending. I think that everyone agrees with that but the question is where to make those cuts. We all agree that we have to make cuts. One of the first places to make them, obviously, is in the investment allowance. This revenue, foolishly forgone, is every bit as much a Government expenditure as social secu tiry but a cut in this area would be much more equitable. This is where the Government should be cutting expenditure. I refer to the Fortescue oil field. The Government will forgo in the life of that field at least $3 billion in revenue. This is reckless Government expenditure. Money not collected is money foolishly squandered. The people of Australia are not naive. They know that if the Government does not collect money from this oil field, which would be equitable, it will collect it from them. That is fairly basic but, as I think I have observed before, very few Government members .seem to understand how the system works. We also ought to look at the tremendous growth in tax avoidance. People say that it started under the Labor Government. That is true but it was only a small beginning. It has proliferated under the present Government simply because of the judgments of a corrupt High Court, formerly headed by a corrupt Chief Justice. There is nothing in the Standing Orders that forbids me saying that. It is the simple truth and Government members know it.
Mr Howard-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I seek the guidance of the Chair. Is not the comment of the honourable member for Kalgoorlie about the former Chief Justice unparliamentary?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) -I uphold the point of order. I think the com ment was unparliamentary and I ask the honour able member for Kalgoorlie to withdraw.
Mr CAMPBELL-I withdraw the comment. The Mundroola syndrome has given the Aus tralian people a clear guideline. They think that if the people at the top can rip off the system it is okay for them to do so. The High Court has made valid every contrived source of tax avoidance. That is the crux of the matter. Tax avoidance has reached such 1I tage that the only thing that can

now stop it is retrospective legislation. We prob ably need even more than that. We need a com plete change of attitude in this country. We need a government of national reconciliation-an Aus tralian Labor Party Government. I believe that only an Australian Labor Party Government can heal the breaches in the community. The perverse philosophy that exists today was started in 1975 when a party was prepared to bowl underarm to achieve its own ends. It set guidelines for the rest of Australia. It introduced an 'I'm all right Jack' system-get what you can, how you can, when you can.
That is the basis of the greed underlying the sys tem we have today. In my opinion the only thing that will cure it is the election of an Australian Labor Party government. I believe that the Aus tralian Labor Party is the only party that can achieve a national concensus. The Government is benefiting only one section ofthe community. The Peters that it is robbing to pay Paul are the poor people. One has only to look at the massive in creases in the profits of the large companies. They have done very well. Many people involved in large companies, particularly mining companies, recognise that a resources tax is inevitable. It would be more equitable than the proliferation of greedy State taxes they have to pay now. When a mining company has to pay royalties on a mine it puts an arbitrary life on that mine. It will reach a point when it is no longer economic. People will be thrown out of work simply because of State government tax. That does not occur with a re sources tax. Obviously, if the mine is not making money it will not pay a resources tax. It will keep on producing for a much longer time. It is so simple.
The only reason that Government members do not grasp this is that they are ideologically blind. They have been blinded by their own ideology for so long that they fail to see reason. It is possible that a few Government supporters may recognise what I am saying but they are so timorous and intimidated by their party structure that they are unable or unwilling to do anything about it. Until they are prepared to bite the bullet and see that what they are doing in this country is inequitable and divisive there will never be any real harmony in the country. We will not be able to bring to the community the justice that the taxation system should bring. We will not see the benefits that a just taxation system would bestow on the tremen dous development potential of this country.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (9.26)-1 appreci ate the opportunity of supporting the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in the statement he has made on taxation. I must confess that I am appalled at the

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 787

negative attitude of the Opposition. I am appalled recognise that. The Treasurer's record in

at the arguments and the criticism it has put up endeavouring to counter tax avoidance is '-Iuite

while, at the same time, making no positive extensive. T h e ho n o u rable member for

suggestions. The purpose of the Treasurer's state Gellibrand (Mr Willis) virtually joked that there

ment was to put the public at rest about the wild have been 300 pages of taxation legislation deal

speculation on taxation programs that it was said ing with tax avoidance. I do not think that is a jok

would be introduced. Such speculation only ing matter; I think that represents a fine effort by

causes economic and general disruption through the Treasurer, an effort which indicates clearly

out the country. Over the last two, three or four that we are concerned and we will not condone

years people have been speculating about re tax avoidance or tax minimisation.

sources taxes, retail turnover taxes and other taxes. That is not good for the community. The Treasurer's statement has proved to the people that the Government is looking for a better and fairer tax system. In the Treasurer's lengthy speech he clearly showed the advantages and dis advantages of the options that the Government has explored and the reasons that it has not been able to adopt some of the suggestions. The state ment was a comprehensive summary which outlined the complexity of our tax system. No one will deny that the system is complex and that it should continually be revised and improved. The statement indicated the options that the Govern ment has considered and gave the reasons why none of those options could be taken up. One of

Another important factor that must be con sidered when planning our future tax system is that the system must maintain the incentive of the individual to maximise his or her earnings. If we have a system which overtaxes people, if people through that overtaxing mechanism lose the will to earn, the system will be destroyed-it will be come non-workable. It frightens me that the Op position would overtax people and destroy their initiative and incentive to work and to earn money. Finally, a tax system must produce sufficient revenue to ensure that we can carry on adequate programs to provide essential services, that is, programs associated with pensions, edu cation and health, just to mention the main ones.

the reasons is that they would have caused disrup tion in the community and that is one thing that we do not want.

Over recent years one of the burdens that have been placed on our tax revenue comes through the affluence of this country. People are retiring

As 1 said, our tax system is complex. There is earlier than previously. People are recipients of

dissatisfaction with it as there will always be. As pensions at a much earlier age. People are being

necessary as we realise it is, no one likes paying educated for longer. Once again, those things re

tax, no matter who he is. The statement that has quire financing. If people are being educated for

been made tonight is not the end of the issue. It is longer and people are retiring earlier, the percent

the start of improving the present system, making age of the popUlation paying tax is diminishing.

it watertight and fair to all. A taxation system So, in recent years, a lot of the increase in de

needs simplicity. It certainly should be understood mands made of taxpayers has been as a result of

by the taxpayer. It must be efficient. Of course, for affluence. If we look at the thrust and intention of

it to be efficient taxes must be collected with a the present tax system we find that it has many of

minimum of public expense. Most important of the qualities I have mentioned. But as I said, to a

all-T am sure that honourable members will not certain extent the system has been destroyed by

disagree with me-it must be fair to all. It must the professional promoters of tax minimisation

ensure that the tax burden falls equally on the schemes. Contrary to what Opposition speakers shoulders of all according to their ability to pay. I have said, the breeding ground for those tax mini

think all honourable members opposite will agree misation schemes was established in the years that

with that. It must be clear in its interpretation and Opposition members were in government,

it must be able to stand the test of the law. That is namely, from 1 972 to 1 975.

something which we have not had. The tax system we have had, because of the law, has not main

Opposition members interjecting-

tained the thrust that the Government originally Mr BRADFIELD-You can look at the tax

intended it to have.

ation statistics and you will see that in those years

Mrs Darling-Why don't we change the law? Mr BRADFIELD-Honourable members op posite did not change the law when they were in government. The effectiveness of the law has been destroyed by the professional promoter of tax

taxation rates increased enormously. In those years people were driven to look at tax minimis ation schemes and you did nothing whatsoever about it. That is when it started. It will be rectified.

minimisation schemes. We and the Treasurer Opposition members interjecting-

788 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 198 1

Taxation System

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) Order! The honourable member for Barton will address the Chair. I ask honourable members on my left to remain silent.
Mr BRADFIELD-I apologise to you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I was addressing you but I was being intimidated by some honourable members on the other side of the chamber. People know how much taxation rates increased in the years 1 972 to 1 975. When people look at the statistics for those years they can see why so many people began looking at tax minimisation schemes and tax avoidance schemes.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I too have some feelings for the wage and salary earner. I agree with some of the points made by Opposition speakers. I fully realise, as does the Treasurer and the Govern ment, that over the past six years the amount of tax taken from business enterprises. The Govern ment is well aware of that and we want to stop that trend. It is true that in the past six years total pay-as-you-earn taxation-that is, the tax taken from the wage and salary earner-increased by 1 00 per cent, as the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) pointed out. At the same time, I certainly am well aware, as is the Treasurer, that the amount of tax taken from business enterprises throughout Australia increased by only 40 per cent in that time. We must arrest that trend. I hope that we will be able to do so.
The Treasurer mentioned the fact that in an in ternational sense Australia is not a high-tax country. Many Opposition members want to dis prove that claim. I have a copy of a book written by Russell Mathews of the Australian National University which clearly shows that people in many countries are taxed at a far higher rate than are the Australian people. The book lists coun tries such as Sweden, Luxembourg, Norway, the N etherlands, Denmark, Finland, B elgium, France, Austria, Ireland, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy, Canada, New Zealand and Swit zerland. People in all those countries pay a higher rate of tax than do people in Australia. That is a significant list of countries. How can honourable members opposite claim that Australia is a high tax country when we see that people in all those countries pay a higher rate of tax?
Mr Jull-We still want it to be less. It's too high.
Mr BRADFIELD-Of course we want the tax rate to be lower, as my colleagues point out. We are not prepared to rest on the fact that our rate of taxation is lower than that of all those coun tries. We want to reduce that rate. We want to lessen the tax burden for the Australian people.

The Treasurer's speech illustrates his continuing efforts to lessen tax avoidance. He mentioned that he hopes shortly to have section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act rewritten and brought into this Parliament. That section deals with tax avoid ance. It is hoped that when it is amended it will stand up to the test of the law. The Treasurer mentioned also that he wants to amend section 1 36 of that Act. Of course, that section deals with something that I know the Opposition is dearly interested in; namely, the tax payable by overseas companies based in Australia on transfers of in come to the overseas parent companies. We could go on and consider all those avenues. The Treasurer is aware of them. I think that his speech tonight makes every honourable member aware of the fact that we want to continue to improve the system and to provide a fair deal for all.
I mention also one part of the Treasurer's speech which deals with a matter that is very dear to me. I think it is terribly important to all the Australian people. I refer to honourable members to what the Treasurer said towards the end of his speech when he stated:
Recently questions have been raised as to whether sufficient opoprtunity exists for the small investor to participate in re source development.
It is terribly important that the Treasurer recog nise that fact. It is very important to the future of Australia that that fact be recognised and that an incentive be created for people to invest directly, to participate directly and to reap the benefits of resources development and the associated devel opment that will come to this country. It is very important to enterprise in Australia. It is some thing which must go hand in hand with the devel opment which will take place in Australia. What the Treasurer said in his speech has clearly shown what areas we have looked at and what we have in mind for the future to make this tax system fairer. It is a long way from the negative cries of the honourable member for Gellibrand and other honourable members on the Opposition side who really have put forward nothing positive.
I ask honourable members to recall some of the comments of the honourable member for Gellibrand. He totally rejected the present tax system, but he neglected to say what sort of a sys tem he would have. He talked about the present system being regressive. He used the word 're gressive' just after he talked about the three-tier scale under which those people who earn more pay a higher rate of tax. How on earth can that be regressive? He also said that the Government was concerned about the impact on inflation of any tax changes which was clearly set out in the

Taxation System

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 789

Treasurer's statement. Should not we be con cerned about the impact on inflation? We are con cerned about inflation. Honourable members op posite were not concerned in the few years when they were in government. That was one of the things which destroyed the economy of the country, which destroyed thp. tax system and which brought about the breeding ground for the tax avoidance schemes that we have today. It has been my pleasure to support the Treasurer's state ment. It clearly demonstrates to the people of Australia that all the speculation on tax schemes that has been going on over the last two years is now put to rest and I think this will give people a lot more confidence.

taxation they accounted for 44 per cent ofthe rev enue, in round figures. If one adds to this petrol taxes and other indirect taxes one finds that 67 per cent, in round figures, of taxation paid in this country is paid by the ordinary wage and salary earners. No wonder the Treasurer finds it very difficult to squeeze more money out of them. Con trast that with company taxes which amount to only 14 per cent in round figures-of taxation paid in this country is paid by the ordinary wage and salary earners. The 10 per cent of Australians who own more than 60 per cent of our wealth contribute only 1 4 per cent to our tax revenue whilst the wage and slalary earners are taxed more and more every year by this Government.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (9.4 1 )-Unlike the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) , r can say that no part of the statement by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is dear to me. The long awaited and if I may say so the long heralded statement by our Treasurer has finally been delivered. The statement had been scheduled for delivery on Tuesday of this week. However, the Treasurer found it difficult to fill the empty paper in front of him with an empty speech. It took him till today. He took a long time to say little. I do not envy the Treasurer's position as he is endeavour ing to increase revenue without taxing the rich and the mighty. However, I trust that with his in genuity he will be able by Budget time to play a new confidence trick and further fleece the ordi nary wage and salary earner.
Irrespective of what the Treasurer had to say, or rather what he really omitted to say, because I suspect more is coming in the next Budget, let me examine the position as far as taxation is con cerned today. Let me examine who carries the burden when it comes to revenue collection. I hope honourable gentlemen opposite did not for get to analyse the Treasurer's Budget last year. He delivered it with a confidence of a used car sales man, not so long ago-last August as a matter of fact. One has to ask what went wrong with it be cause only a couple of months later, after the October election, the Government suddenly dis covered that it had to look for more avenues to squeeze out a few more dollars from the ordinary wage and salary earners, in other words, from the ordinary family man of Australia; not that it did not do well in that respect in the Budget of 1 980.
Let me deal with a few of the figures in that B udget. The wage and salary earners of this country had to carry the main burden. In direct

In case J am accused of distorting the figures by referring only to the 1 980-8 1 Budget let me look at the figures over a longer period. The ratio of company tax to pay-as-you-earn collections was 43.9 per cent in 1970-7 1 . This figure has fallen to 26.4 per cent in 1 980-8 1 . Let me deal with other sets of figures. Company tax in relation to the gross operating surplus dropped from 40 per cent in 1 974-75 to 27.8 per cent in 1979-80. The pro portion of Federal revenue derived by company tax has fallen from 1 8.6 per cent in 1 969-70 to 1 2. 5 per cent in 1 979-80. Whichever way one looks at these figures it becomes obvious that only nuts and wage and salary earners pay tax in this country under this conservative Government. The companies and the rich friends of the gentlemen who sit opposite know how to avoid taxes legally or illegally.
Mr Harris-I am not rich. Mr KENT-Your friends are. One has to con sider also that the small proportion of taxes, the 14 per cent that is meted out to companies, is paid mainly by small companies while the large multinationals escape the tax man by cooking their books. Of course when they were taken to the High Court on this matter our former Chief Justice, who was not too bad at that practice him self, found that they were quite right when they cheated. Because tax avoidance became big busi ness under this Government, not before, the ordi nary people have to pay more taxes to make up for the cheats and crooks. That practice of tax avoidance was sanctioned by a stacked High Court. The small companies, the small businesses, have to make up for the big fish who elude the fish salesman. No wonder there are so many bankruptcies of small businesses as they find it harder and harder to carry the burden. Let me quote from a good authority on this. In my maiden speech on 4 December last year I said:

790 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Taxation System

There were nearly twice as many bankruptcies i n business and industry under three years ofFraser Government as there were under three years of Labor Government. There were 6,952 bankruptcies between 1 972 and 1975 as opposed to

the Treasurer can squeeze from the poor and since he does not want to hurt his rich friends, he is now in a dilemma. Following upon the last big

1 1,970 bankruptcies in the last three years of the Fraser tax confidence trick by the Prime Minister, the in

Government.

troduction of petrol taxes, his imagination and

Let the business and industry sectors speak up for that of the Treasurer have somewhat run dry-as

themselves. They are quite vocal and able to do will our Bass Strait oil production in a few years.

so. I want honourable members to look at the or Like a desperate angler, the Treasurer is casting

dinary family man and see what the taxation poli around for ideas on how to tax more and more the

cies of this Government have done to him. Of ordinary people, while he and the Prime Minister

course honourable members opposite, including protect the astronomical profits of trans-national

the honourable member for Barton who preceded compaies.

me in this debate but who has now left the chamber, would not know how to fill in an S form and they do not know how hard the wage and sal ary earners have been hit by this Treasurer. A few years ago every wage earner who was compiling his yearly tax return-believe me, I have assisted many as a voluntary welfare worker-found that he had a handsome cheque to expect as a refund. What is the position today? Most of them have to cough up an additional amount at the end of the financial year to make up for the tax evader friends of this Government.

Only a couple of days ago the Prime Minister defended in this House the cheap electricity rates offered the Alcoa aluminium smelting company. While he was advocating subsidised electricity rates for trans-national companies he smartly for got his election promise to bring down tax cuts. The ordinary taxpayer is remembered by this Prime Minister at election time only. In contrast, the rich fare much better. I do not begrudge a fair return being received on investment, especially if companies pay a fair share of taxes, but let us not forget that here we are dealing with large, foreign

Of course we have to pay for the various con trans-national giants which do not spend their

cessions and subsidies which are given to .the rich earnings in Australia for the benefit of Aus

by the Treasurer. To make it more palatable to tralians. The amount of repatriated profits is

the ordinary worker who honestly pays his taxes increasing year by year. In 1 97 1 -72, 26.2c of each

the Government uses euphemisms such as 'invest dollar of company income was taken out of the

ment allowance', 'superphosphate bounty', country. In 1 977-78 this figure rose to 35.6c. So

'export incentives' and so on to cover up for the much for the Prime Minister's promise that every

subsidies to the rich. These are not the only injus Australian would share the prosperity created by

tices in our tax system. Indirect taxes are imposing the resources development boom. If honourable

a heavy burden on Australian families. The most members think that I am alone in voicing that

iniquitous of all is the petrol tax. Petrol tax rev opinion, they should have listened to what Mr

enue rose from $476m in 1 977-78 to $3, 1 57m in Stone had to say. Of course, it is said now that he

1 980-8 1 . Let us forget about these astronomical was misreported. H e might have been

figures and consider the position of the ordinary misreported but he was very well understood

motorist who, during the last year of the term of when he was advocating a resources tax. I should

the former Labor Government, was paying 1 3c a also like to quote from an article by Michael Gill

litre and is now paying 39c a litre, three times as in the Melbourne Age of 3 March 198 1 . Under

much, under the Fraser Government. He is pay the title 'Tax man in a dilemma' he says:

ing that amount for petrol that costs $1 a barrel to But the Government has rapidly run itself out alternatives

produce today, the same as it did in 1 975. Dr Edwards-It is a lot cheaper than it is
overseas.

to oil income. Meanwhile many in the community expect the promised tax cuts-soon.
There are a few things Mr Howard can do. He can, and says he will soon, introduce a wide-ranging change to income tax

Mr KENT-It is cheaper but the point is that it law to catch tax avoiders.

is our own, we do not import it. Our prices are set The Treasurer has the rehetoric but is somewhat

not by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting lacking in action. While the bonanza to the

Countries but by this Government, with its taxes. mining companies continues the burden of ordi

But, irrespective of figures and statistics, every nary Australians grows. The real value of the fam

motorist knows that although a few years ago it ily allowance is much less today than it was when

cost him only $5 to fill his tank, it now costs him it was introduced. Likewise, the real value of pen

$20 or more. On the order of the Prime Minister sions has decreased under this Government. The

(Mr Malcolm Fraser) , the Treasurer has turned actual value of take-home pay is less than when it

every petrol pump in Australia into a branch of came to office. Again, under this Government the

the Taxation Office. Since there is no more that average Australian family is $ 1 6 to $20 a week

Taxation System

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 79 1

worse off than it was five years ago. One does not have to be an economist to see the worsening financial position of the Australian family. One has only to go into the supermarket on Thursday, the pension day, to see how pensioners and low in come families are forced to seek out specials, to buy inferior quality products, because they cannot afford to buy better foodstuffs.

Professor Russell Mathews, who was quoted earlier, summed this up best when he said in January 1 980 that tax avoidance had flourished on such a scale as to make personal income tax a voluntary tax for the rich non-salary earner. I n re ferring to the emphasis which had been given to vertical equity in the design of the Australian in come tax system, he said:

Although the Treasurer has been defeated on his proposal to introduce indirect taxes, I suspect that he is still flirting with the idea. In that con nection, the following passage from his speech is worth noting:
There was, and perhaps still is, a fairly widely held view in the community that a quite noticeable reduction in personal income tax can be achieved through a relatively modest in crease in reliance on indirect taxation.
Let us not kid ourselves; he has not given up the idea. He is a very persistent man. He will keep picking the pocket of the ordinary family man un less we become stronger and stronger and defeat him at the next election.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (9.56)-1 welcome this statement by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) be cause the whole question of taxation reform has long been the subject of considerable public de bate. It is high time that debate was brought into this chamber. However, it is a pity that we are required to debate a 26-page comprehensive state ment upon a complex issue straight after it has been made. J regard that as a regrettable way in which to run the House. It really does not give honourable members time to express a considered opinion on the matter.
I believe that the decision that has been taken by the Government not to broaden the tax base by moving away from our very high level of depen dence on direct taxes is a reasonable one given the circumstances outlined in the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) . But if this is to be the case it becomes even more important for the Government to act much more effectively against the present abuse of our income tax system. Whilst I congratulate the Treasurer and the Government upon the way in which they have actively sought to close down those artificial tax avoidance schemes which have come to t heir notice, there is no doubt that there has been a massive shift in the distribution of the personal in come tax burden as between wage and salary earners and other taxpayers-a shift from the rich to the poor as a result of massive tax avoidance schemes. Again, the burden has shifted as upper income groups have successfully participated in such schemes, and as tax evasion has been prac tised by those who have the opportunity to par ticiDate actively in the cash economy.

. . . the essential problem is not to make the rich pay higher rates of tax, or even more tax, than the poor-it is to make the rich pay any income tax at all. There has recently been some discussion about the potential for a tax revolt in Australia. It must be recognised that a massive tax revolt has already taken place, but it is a revolt of business taxpayers against wage and salary earners of the rich against the poor.
Thus, despite the Government's record of introducing some 24 legislative measures against income avoidance arrangements-a record which is much be tter than that of t h e Labor Government-the fact remains that t hese people stay well ahead of the Taxation Office investi gators. Therefore, I am very pleased that the Treasurer has indicated that the rewriting of sec tion 260, which is the general anti-avoidance pro vision of the Income Tax Assessment Act, is now almost complete and will soon be presented to the Parliament. The people whom 1 represent, the lower and middle income earning family units, are paying for this massive rip-off.
Only if the Government can succeed in implementing this catch-all provision will the intended equality of the income tax system, on which we are more dependent than is almost any other member country of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, be come a reality. But I do not agree that a greater re liance on indirect taxes should be advocated if the prime objective is to catch the tax avoiders. This would only make the taxation system much more regressive than it is already. I would still maintain that position even if exemptions were introduced in order to make the indirect taxation system slightly more progressive in its impact.
I maintain that the tax avoiders who suggest that a switch in the tax base would reduce their incentives to avoid tax would still be seeking to ig nore their responsibilities even if the tax rates were significantly reduced. Of course, the fact re mains that if everyone paid his way now, under a government committed to expenditure restraint, everyone would be able to receive a substantial tax cut anyway, without adversely affecting the Budget deficit. My only objection to the present direct taxation system is that the taxes are too high and they do not, therefore, meet the essential criterion mentioned by the Treasurer of being

792 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Taxation System

consistent with the Government's overall econ omic objectives, particularly of providing the pri vate sector with the incentives which are needed to encourage investment growth and generally improved employment opportunities. Although economic recovery is well under way in this country I sometimes wonder how much stronger the economy and the labour market would now be if we had pursued these often stated government objectives more vigorously and consistently.
I agree with the Treasurer when he says that the inflationary impact of a large-scale change from direct to indirect taxes could not be tolerated, even though this makes it harder to cope with the cash economy tax evasion. Using his own figures, to convert the existing 32-46-60 rate scale into a 27-41 -55 rate scale, would involve a total cost to revenue of some $3,000m. If this rev enue loss were recovered through indirect taxes, inflation would increase by 5 per cent to 6 per cent on the Treasurer's reckoning. Although some have argued that this would be a once-off in crease, the fact remains that in the absence of any guarantee of discounting by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, this increase could be come institutionalised, causing a continuous round of cost-price increases. Having said that, I think I should also state that any taxation in crease, whether it is direct or indirect, will eventu ally harm our cost structure and reduce our inter national competitiveness. Once again in this statement the Treasurer has mentioned that the choice confronting him is to axe or tax. In the con clusion of his speech, he states:
The most dominant reality is that Governments cannot tax less unless they spend less.
That is quite true; I thoroughly agree with it. But I do think that the Government's credibility in this area has been strained over the past six months, although I was encouraged by the Government's recent actions regarding the Olympic Games in 1 988 and Expo '88. I certainly acknowledge that in the fiscal area the budgetary problems are very substantial. With oil revenue sources slowing down, with many alternative tax source options now being excluded, with tax indexation, with necessary but massive defence expenditure in creases, and with many very essential humani tarian welfare programs being indexed, the Government is certainly facing very difficult budgetary problems, particularly given the demo graphic status of the population. Therefore, there certainly remains a very great need for the Government to control expeqditure.
I hope that in its present review of expenditure the so-called razor gang will come to grips with the kinds of stupid expenditure commitments the

Government made last year regarding a motor racing circuit in Canberra, a rowing and canoeing course in Tasmania, a shooting complex in Queensland, a ballistics complex in Western Australia, an eqIJestrian centre in Victoria and so forth. There are many other examples I could mention. Although these facilities may all be worth while and much needed by specific interest groups, I do not regard them as top national priorities when the alternatives are lower taxes, greater scope for private sector employment or better welfare programs for the needy.
Although those particular items of expenditure that I have referred to do not amount to massive sums of money, I think that they do nothing for the overall credibility of a government committed to budgetary restraint. I cannot and I will not at any timejustify cutting expenditure on the needy, and I trust that the Government will not do so. Given some of the ridiculous priorities outlined to the Australian people last year, any move to cut expenditure in more essential areas will be almost impossible to tolerate and justify. That is not to say that there is no fat left to cut. I think there is, and I think it has to be cut. But it has to be done with a lot more sensitivity and consistency than has been the case in the past.
I agree that if we must have extravagant government, higher taxes are preferable to big deficits from an economic management point of view. The decision to limit the tax base will, I hope, act as a constraint on the kinds of expendi tures to which I have referred. From the point of view of the impact on individuals and families, whether we have higher taxes or bigger deficits does not really matter. Everyone gets hurt either way. In this context I remind the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) , who seemed to imply that there was not a great deal wrong with budget deficits, that home buyers around Australia are paying now for past extravagances of government because the present round of interest rate increases basically stems from the kind of fiscal history which we have had. We are now trying to finance the expanding borrowing re quirements of governments and their extravagan ces over the past 1 0 years.
If governments can reduce their expenditure sufficiently-this means much more successfully than in recent years-all Australians, in my opinion, may be able to look forward to the day when they will face lower taxes, lower mortgage payments and higher real incomes. That is the re ality facing every Australian at present. The aver age Australian with his average commitments is

Taxation System

1 2 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 793

having some difficulty because of the fiscal prob he dares parade before us in his self-satisfied

lems which have not been adequately tackled over fashion.

the past decade.

While we are thinking about history one thing

Finally, I wish to comment on the Treasurer's that is certain is that only a very short period will

reference to single income families. Under the be required to discredit totally the absurd econ

present taxation system the tax avoiders, the cash omic philosophy by which this Government pre

economy tax evaders and the two income families tends to guide this nation. The disastrous course

are all facing lower tax liabilities than wage and along which that ideological love of the Prime

salary earners supporting family units on a single Minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, has led the

income. As the Treasurer said, the tax burden on United Kingdom will, if the present policies per

single income families is greater than that on two sist, also manifest itself in this country. By some

income families with equivalent family income peculiar logic the Treasurer considers that to have

levels, notwithstanding the fact that their house been responsible for the greatest increase in tax

hold expenditure obligations are very similar. I ation in Australian history is something of which

congratulate the Treasuer on the way in which the to be proud. At the same time we have witnessed

Government acted in this area last year and the biggest reduction in the growth of public ser

helped to redress this imbalance by substantially vices, especially funds available for education,

increasing the dependent spouse rebate. But I em social welfare, transport, urban development and

phasise to the Treasurer that the single income conservation. In other words, the Treasurer is

family remains the great new poverty group in our proud of the fact that he is taxing the Australian

society. The family unit, the basis of our society, people a lot more and giving them a lot less. Aus

will remain at risk unless the Treasurer gives the tralian people are getting less value for their

single income family the absolute top priority for money.

taxation reform and relief in the near future.

Whilst the Liberal Party and its leaders are well

The Treasurer's statement gave some idea of known for showing contempt towards the average

the magnitude of this problem when he cited some Australian, it must surely be clear to everyone in

statistics which indicated that there are some 1 .25 this nation that we are paying too much in taxes

million taxpayers with a dependent spouse in this for the services that we receive and that far too

country. They are the people who were clearly much of our money is being squandered on con

identified two years ago by the Department of cessions and privileges for the Prime Minister (Mr

Social Security as the emerging poverty group in Malcolm Fraser) and his wealthy friends. Instead

this country. I believe that for social, economic of repentance for this state of affairs the

and compassionate reasons this Government Treasurer congratulates himself day after day in

really has to do a lot more to help the single in this House and claims that he has achieved some

come family unit. I place that at the top of my pri kind of economic recovery and that the country is

ority list and I hope that the Treasurer does the about to experience some kind of economic mir

same when he considers the tax reforms for the acle which the media love to refer to as a boom. In

coming Budget.

a moment I shall demonstrate that this is an

Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) ( lO.8)-This morning the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) apparently believed that he was insulting me by comparing me with the great mathematician Pythagoras. There are two things which can uncontroversially be said of Pythagoras. Firstly, his theories were clear, coherent and they stood the test of time. Secondly, he believed that to gain

example of distorted and unbalanced perception whereby one sees only those facts that suit one and ignores the rest. However, one of the most im portant things about the democratic socialist tra dition is that it has always made a distinction be tween appearance and reality. Nowhere is this distinction more crucial than in the study of econ omics and economic systems.

a true understanding of life we should look at the When looking at the dynamics of an economy

facts and figures before us in a balanced way. The we should ask: Whose interests does that activity

wisdom that Pythagoras had is totally and com serve? Who will that development benefit? If we

pletely lacking in the Government's economic ask such questions about the so-called recovery

policies which have resulted in this increased tax and the so-called resources boom in the Aus

ation burden on the majority of the Australian tralian economy certain facts come to light. The

people. Indeed, the economic theories of the most important fact is that some economic indi

Treasurer (Mr Howard) have so blinded him to cators are chosen because they seem to demon

the real economic situation within this nation that strate recovery while other indicators are ignored.

he cannot even perceive the essential injustice and A recent article in the National Times was

inequity of the set of statistics on taxation which headed: 'Despite Inflation and Unemployment,

794 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981

Taxation System

the Dark Days of the Slump are Over'. Unem ployment in Australia is dismissed despite its con tinued existence as an almost irrelevant item in an assessment of economic recovery. Unfortunately, many Australian economic journalists seem also to have adopted this unbalanced approach and seem unable to recognise that there are different frameworks of economic thought and different viewpoints which can be presented, even given the statistical data. Nowhere is this more obvious than in the debate about the so-called recovery or boom. It is only by a realistic and balanced assess ment of our economic situation that we can poss ibly hope to develop a rational and fair taxation policy, while at the same time providing an econ omy which maximises the satisfying of human needs.
Mr Deputy Speaker, with your indulgence, I would like to say what such a balanced approach would involve. Of course, no one denies that there are substantial planned developments of our re sources by multinational corporations, especially in energy and minerals. Large amounts of foreign capital directed at this resource development are pouring into Australia. The issue that still remains is: What benefit will this have on the overwhelm ing proportion of Australian people? This point raises the important issue of a resources tax to which my colleagues have referred in earlier speeches. Let us look at certain other aspects of the Australian economy which media commen tators and the Treasurer habitually ignore. These point not to recovery or to a boom but, in fact, to a crisis. I wish to mention three aspects: Firstly, the run down of Australian manufacturing indus try. The extent of this run down was documented by Peter Robinson in his book The Crisis in Australian Capitalism. Robinson pointed to the fact that Australia's manufacturing industries were increasingly going to the wall, especially where they were forced to compete with Asian imports-the latter, of course, being produced in economies where virtual slave wages are paid to workers. Robinson concluded as follows:
If we fail to evolve a coherent manufacturing strategy we will find ourselves racked by periodic economic crises, given to internal bickering and doomed to a steadily declining standard of living. At worst, the strains which such a scenario suggest will lead to the kind of schisms in Australian society that Pro fessor Manning Clark foresees in his direst moods. Questions such as who controls Australia's natural wealth, who profits from it and who disposes of it will divide Australians, embitter their society and leave them vulnerable to external pressures.
Secondly, I mention the large increases in the level of unemployment. I will not say much about this as we have heard a great deal about it in this House. I repeat that the total number of people out of work has reached the highest level since the

great depression of the 1 930s. But the human di mensions of this unemployment crisis-which is what it has been called by many commeritators have yet to be assessed. Thirdly, I mention the dramatic increases in the number of people living in poverty. From 1 975 to 1 980 the number of people living below the Henderson poverty line increased from one million to two million; an in crease of 1 00 per cent. This claim, which the Government attempted to deny, was made by the Catholic Commission of Bishops in Australia. It has been supported by more detailed figures from the Australian Council ofSocial Service. Needless to say, these organisations and other bodies are pressing for urgent action to change this disgrace ful situation.
How can the Treasurer and some economic commentators blithely describe this situation as a recovery or a boom? A balanced approach would be to look at the minuses as well as the pluses. As an example of such a description I recommend that honourable members read the first para graphs of a book written by the highly respected economist Dr Peter Sheehan entitled Crisis in Abundance in which he explains quite clearly that, on the one hand, Australia has high unem ployment, high inflation, serious problems with the social and educational structures and so forth, while on the other hand it has what appears to be an abundance of natural resources from which a small group of Australians are benefiting. We have to look at this realistic situation if we are going to develop a coherent taxation policy.
In the post-war period it was a popular belief that there could be an increasing development of the public sector-government services of all kinds-and that sufficient money to pay for this expansion could be raised without government in tervention in the private enterprise economy. This belief could be maintained during the period of substantial growth which has been called the great boom from 1 945 to 1 970. It is obvious that there were understandable reasons for this view. After all, from 1 945 to 1 970 real gross domestic product grew at a rate of 4.5 per cent per annum. How ever, in the last few years the situation has been completely different. From 1 976 to 1 979 real GDP increased by only 2.8 per cent while infla tion rose at a rate of 1 1 per cent; a very important factor to keep in mind. In our present economic situation more taxes are being paid while at the same time fewer services are being provided. We can no longer rely upon unrealistic predictions of economic growth to pay for government services, especially while. inflation goes ahead of the level of growth. Even if services are reduced, as the

Taxation System

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 795

Prime Minister has attempted to do, the Govern ment will not have sufficient money while infla tion continues to outstrip growth. This phenom enon is what the American economist James O'Connor called the fiscal crisis of the state. Each year the Liberals have imposed more and more taxes, notably the notorious crude oil levy on pet rol which raised $2,500m extra in the last year; yet the Budget deficit last year was not significantly an improvement on that of the last Whitlam Government, even though services have been severely reduced. This clearly shows that Australia is suffering from the phenomenon which I have described as the fiscal crisis.
The Treasurer has no strategy to deal with this situation. He does not even understand it. What does he propose to do when the oil levy from dom estic production no longer permits the Govern ment to achieve a tax rip-off? Does the Govern ment propose to slash further the services provided to the people? If not, will it do what Mrs Thatcher did this week and dramatically increase the taxation burden on the people? When one recognises the nature of the problem one can put forward some proposals to deal with it. There are alternatives to which my colleagues have already referred, such as the resources tax and laws against transfer pricing. However, it is my view that there is one alternative which we must in the long run countenance to solve the fundamental types of problems that I have mentioned which other Western countries are suffering from. We must increase public ownership and participation in productive enterprises; that is to say, the people as a whole must, through their Government, take out a greater share of the wealth generated in the resources area and other areas of the economy. In the last Budget net receipts from government owned enterprises amounted to only $264m out of a total of $27,305m. This is one of the lowest rates of contribution by a productive sector of the state in the world. Unless we expand this sector-the sector of government and publicly owned enterprises-especially in the areas where wealth is being generated in this nation, particularly in the resources area, in the long term we will not be able to solve our fiscal problems; nor will we be able to reduce the taxation burden on the middle and lower income families of this nation. The crisis in our economy will continue.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) ( l0.23)-If the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous), who has just resumed his seat, im plied by his opening remarks that the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) was in grievous error in call ing him Pythagoras this morning I would be in clined to agree with him.

Mr Baume-What should we call him? Dr EDWARDS-My colleague says: 'What should we call him?' Perhaps 'myxomatosis' be cause of his effect on the truth. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! I rather hope the honourable member did not have the intention of reflecting on the honour able member for Burke. If he did I am obliged to ask him to withdraw. Dr Kent-I consider that to be a racist state ment. It has no place in this Parliament. I consider it extremely offensive. I ask the honourable member to withdraw or I will deal with him personally. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is obliged to uphold the point of order. I ask the honourable member to withdraw. Dr EDWARDS-I withdraw, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member accused this Government of presiding over 'the greatest in crease in taxation in Australia's history'. That is rot and he knows it, as the Australian people know it. This Government and this Government alone has the determination and the capacity to contain and reduce in a responsible manner the total paid in tax. I refer honourable members to table 3 in the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) which I think the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) said earlier was so much history. However, I think that history is worth reflecting on. The table shows that from 1 972 to 1 975 when the Labor Government was in office taxation receipts as a percentage of gross domestic product increased by two to three percentage points-not by two per cent or three per cent from a level of about 20 per cent. This was a very substantial increase over a very short period. The percentage increase over the period that this Government has been in office has been only frac tional. If we take the Commonwealth and State taxation receipts as a percentage of GDP-we should never lose sight of the fact that the States have hardly had to increase their taxes and charges in recent years because of the large rev enue grants that this Government has made-we find that the percentage has in fact fallen frac tionally. I suggest-no one doubts-that it is the Labor Party which is the socialist, big spending, high inflation, high taxation party. The Australian people recognise that, and the Australian people gave a very clear verdict on that in the last election. What this debate in recent times has been about is the possibility of changing the mix of taxation in a context of aiming to reduce the total. Perhaps before I embark any further in this area I should

796 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 9 8 1

Adjournment

seek leave t o continue m y remarks later s o that another matter can be attended to before the adjournment of the House is moved. I seek leave to continue my remarks.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
PUBLICAnONS COMMITTEE Mr BAUME ( Macarthur)-I present the sec ond report from the Publications Committee.
Report by leaveadopted.
ADJOURNMENT Melbourne City Council-Subaru Motor Vehicles: Reference to Industries Assistance Commission-Resource Rent Tax-Proposed ACTU Superannuation Scheme-Defence Force Pensions-Apex Australia 50th Anniversary Motion (by Mr Viner) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr INNES (Melbourne) ( I O.28)- Tonight I would like to raise a matter which relates not only to my electorate but to the people of Victoria. De spite the accusations of Messrs Hamer and Crozier that they are attempting to sack the Mel bourne City Council because of its alleged mis management, its inability to make long term plan ning decisions and its corruption, it is in fact the Victorian Government which has an abysmal record in these areas, and which, according to its own logic, ought to be sacked. The background to this decision to sack the Council is riddled with connivance, concoction and corrupt, vested interests. The issue of the Bourke Street Mall has been reduced to how trams can be rerouted along Lonsdale Street so that their passengers can be funnelled into Myers through the back door, while leaving the Bourke Street entrance to be redeveloped at public expense as an annexe of the same store. We are, of course, expected to believe it is pure coincidence that the plans of the Hamer Government for the mall are identical to those of the Myer corporation which is a self-confessed philosophical supporter and financial benefactor of the Victorian Liberal Party.
The go-slow by the State Government over legislation relating to the implementation of the city's strategy plan has now been exposed for what it is-a cheap ploy to enable Hamer to accuse the Council of having done nothing to en able development to take place in the central business district. Having created the illusion of the council being unwilling to act on these issues, the Government has placed itself in the position to rip the heart out of the central business district of

Melbourne. This welter of reprehensible circum stances ought to be enough to convince any disin terested observer that whatever legitimacy the Hamer Government may have once had it has long since gone. The ripping out of the heart of the central business district of Melbourne will leave theway open for the millions of dollars from developers who are waiting to transform what has justifiably been described as one of the finest Victorian-era cities in the world into a neo-Los Angeles.
In order to placate the National Party and its s upporters, the Government compulsorily acquired the Council's wholesale markets in the mid1 970s at a direct cost to the ratepayers of $ 1 601. This has resulted in Melbourne having the fastest growing food prices of any State capital. Not being content with this piracy, Hamer now intends, through his quisling administrators, to close the retail Victoria Market at the behest of the supermarket chains. This will further reduce the checks on spiralling food prices and severely affect the ability of low income households to make ends meet. This is not to mention the gross waste of public money that will result as the mar ket has only recently been restored at a cost of three quarters of a million dollars.
The attempt by the Government to reduce the ward boundaries of the City Council must consti tute one of the most blatant (fcts of gerrymander ing that has ever been seen in this country. Liberal Party surveys consistently show that the popu larity of the Victorian Government is plummet ing. On the evidence of the last Liberal poll, the Liberals stand to lose 1 4 seats and government at the next election. Despite the scapegoating which followed the land deals scandal, maladministra tion continues to remain the prime aspect of the Victorian Government's housing policy. Hun dreds of thousands of Victorians are homeless while high rise housing estates remain half empty. Energy is being made available to dangerous in dustries at a discount while householders are forced to buy electricity at rates which effectively subsidise industrial users. Electricity tariffs have been increased as a direct result of increased pay ments by the State Electricity Commission to Consolidated Revenue, that is, an indirect tax on consumers at a time when 48 per cent of those liv ing below the poverty line are unable to afford sufficient heating during winter. As part of the takeover bid on the Melbourne City Council the Government is attempting to appropriate $200,000 from the Council's electricity supply de partment to help cover the SEC's deal with Alcoa of Australia Ltd. The whole range of this scandal lies at the feet of the Victorian Government and

Adjournment

1 2 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 797

the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has an obligation to apply pressure on the State Govern ment by the means that he has available to him. He is a political counterpart of the Victorian Premier and holds the purse strings in respect of tied grants and the like. He should ensure that a public inquiry is held to investigate the impli cations of the action of the Victorian Government in order to protect the democratic rights and the interest of the people of Melbourne.
Mr DEAN (Herbert) ( 10.34) -Subaru is a Japanese motor vehicle which is available for sale in this country. It is distributed by the LNC Indus tries Ltd group and is available in two models. One is a quite attractive front wheel drive sedan. The other is a four wheel drive wagon. Currently the four wheel drive wagon is imported as a four wheel drive commercial vehicle. It is sold under those circumstances and therefore attracts a lesser rate of duty than passenger vehicles. Also it is free from quota restrictions. The problem is that a ref erence has been sent to the Industries Assistance Commission on whether the Subaru should be regarded as a normal two wheel drive type of passenger vehicle rather than a four wheel drive commercial vehicle.
The basis of the reference to the lAC is to ques tion whether there is with Subaru in its four wheel drive wagon configuration a substitution effect, that is, does the four wheel drive wagon take away from normal two wheel drive passenger sales. If it does, it substitutes for passenger vehicles. If that is so, the argument goes, it should be subject to the higher rates of duty and the quotas applicable to passenger vehicles. If that were to happen the effects could be quite disastrous for Subaru.
There are three reasons for suggesting that the reference should not succeed; three reasons for saying that Subaru ought to be allowed to con tinue to sell, in its four-wheel drive configuration, as a commercial vehicle. The first is, of course, the question of substitution. Does the four-wheel drive waggon substitute for two-wheel drive ve hicles? It is not my job to canvass the sort of evi dence that the lAC will be considering or to pre judge what it is likely to find. Suffice it to say that I believe that on careful consideration of many factors it can certainly be argued that there is not a significant substitution effect. Honourable members can look at some figures that are quite readily available. If honourable members look this is in evidence before the lAC-at the use to which four-wheel drive Subarus are put by their owners then they will see quite clearly that those owners have in the main, purchased that vehicle because of its four-wheel drive bush use. It can be

used in circumstances where no normal two wheel drive waggon or any two-wheel drive pass enger vehicle can be used. It can go bush; it can do tougher things than the others.
Secondly, if honourable members look at some of the figures they will find that if there has been any substitution effect, then where Subaru is win ning its sales is not from passenger vehicles but rather from the other four-wheel drive commer cial type vehicles available in this country. In other words Toyota, Nissan, Range Rover and Leyland are the manufacturers suffering at the hands of Subaru's sales. They are suffering be cause Subaru offers a significant price advantage as against those other four-wheel drive vehicles. At the same time, people who buy a Subaru four wheel drive waggon pay a higher price than the normal waggon of its size and power. It is as though people are paying a premium because it is a four-wheel drive vehicle. Thirdly, we can look at a geographical analysis. It happens that in the main the popular Nissan, Toyota, Range Rover type four-wheel drive vehicles sell more in the big cities than in the country. On the other hand, Subaru vehicles sell more in the country than in the big cities. That reinforces the view that it is a vehicle that is acquired by many purchasers be cause of its four-wheel drive capacity, not because of its passenger capacity.
But the whole reference is a nonsense in any event. In Australia the motor vehicle industry is often regarded as being in a whirlpool. Will it go down the hole? We have to break out of that way of thinking. The lAC has said that we must take moves to break out of that. Why on earth then are we considering dragging the Subaru four-wheel drive vehicle into that whirlpool? For God's sake, it is outside the whirlpool now; it ought to remain outside and it ought not be the business of govern ment to try to drag in even another industry into the whirlpool that the whole nation so desperately wants to get out of.
Mr MILTON ( La Trobe) ( 1 0.39)-1 would like to draw attention to a general attitude of the Government in its attempt to ridicule the pro posal by honourable members on this side of the House for the introduction of a resource rent tax. The failure of the Government to introduce this tax means that the resource rich States of Queensland and Western Australia are able to benefit at the expense of the more populous States of Victoria and New South Wales. Let us look at how the Queensland Government is taking advan tage of the situation by imposing its own resource tax. It is reported that the oil company, BP Australia Ltd, and its partners have gained the ap proval of the Queensland Government to explore

798 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

Adjournment

and mine a rich steaming coal deposit in the State. The consortium had offered a $220m royalty for the coal to be shipped from the proposed mine. This royalty is similar to a resource rent tax. This offer comes on top of the many millions of dollars which the Queensland Government gains from other mining corporations in the form of royalties, rail freights, port charges and other infrastructure charges.
This ability of resource-rich States to mount their own taxes is of great concern to States such as Victoria as it means that these revenues are not available as revenue for the Federal Government. It would appear that the Government wants the States of Queensland and Western Australia to benefit from the mineral riches so fortuitously located within their own State boundaries to the detriment of the more populated areas of Australia. A resource rent tax would ensure that some of the riches which are being extracted so avariciously by the transnational mining corpor ations are made available for the benefit of all Australians.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) ( 10.43)-Today's journals carried announcements regarding the Australian Council of Trade Unions' proposed superannuation scheme. The proposal states that the scheme will offer portability and improve re turns to its members. Three separate firms are to be nominated to undertake administration, invest ment and auditing. All that is to be applauded. 1 wish that this Government was further advanced in its investigations of the Hancock report to ensure the availability or portability in the private enterprise schemes. However, the reading of the balance of the article that appeared in the Aus tralian Financial Review becomes almost sinister. I would like to read from this article which quotes, and in fact pictures, the ACTU President, Mr Cliff Dolan. The article states:
The ACTU executive decided to proceed with the estab lishment of the fund and said that, with 2.1 million potential members, it could eventually become a dominant force in Australian investments.
Mr Dolan estimated that the ACTU fund could ultimately have control ofhalf ofAustralia's investment funds.
He hinted that these could be used as a tool of ACTU policy-
What do those few words mean? Before the in vestment advisers are announced, politically _ motivated investment guidelines are emerging. Profit motives which are essential to the success of the scheme are to be curtailed in the interests of totally unrelated ideology. The Press statement also makes it clear on two occasions that the ACTU is not unmindful of how it can use the

accumulated profits to play a power game. Obvi ously again the benefit of the contributors can be submerged by this activity. All that is bad enough but it is also reasonable to read between the lines of this statement to the time when a future ACTU executive will decide to impose its own commer cial judgments on the scheme. The known finan cial expertise of the ACTU as demonstrated in the Bourke's fiasco must point to the dangers of this happening. At this stage I believe any con tributor, whether employer or employee-let us realise that both employer and employee are contributors to superannuation schemes-would have good reason to question sincerely whether such a scheme is in his long term interest and de cline to join. However, we find that that choice is to be refused to the contributor. The same article says of Mr Dolan:
He also suggested that industrial action would be used if it was necessary to persuade employers to participate in the fund.
A similar quotation is attributed to him in the Australian. That statement could not appear to inhibit the worker in his choice of superannu ation. Not much! If the employer is forced into the scheme what option does the worker have? How long will it be before the production of an ACTU superannuation policy will be necessary as a union ticket to get on a work site? It is useless for the ACTU to state that the queries 1 raise will not arise. It has made its position quite clear. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has a right to approve tax deductibility for contributors to superannu ation schemes. 1 trust he will consider the matters I have raised before giving approval in this case.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) ( 1 0.45) - 1 would like to add my good wishes to those of the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) who on Tuesday congratulated the Apex clubs of Australia on their Fiftieth birthday this week. As he said, 'a five minute speech in the adjournment debate cannot recapture 50 years of Apex his tory'. So I am glad of the opportunity to add some words to his. Apex is a uniquely Australian insti tution. It was conceived in Geelong in the depths of the Great Depression and has since expanded to the stage where it is a rare community in this country that does not possess an Apex club. Some 800 Apex clubs exist throughout Australia and some 18,000 young men are currently members. The idea of Apex-young men concerned for their community and prepared to do something about it-has been successfully exported to India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, Fiji, the Philip pines and Papu;l New Guinea following a chal lenge in the mid 1 950s by the then M inister for External Affairs, later Lord Casey.

Adjournment

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 799

Materially, the contribution of Apex to the Australian community has been a great one. Schemes such as the Royal Flying Doctor Service, Guide Dogs for the Blind, compulsory X-rays, Foundation 41 and microsurgery have all been initiated and/or supported by Apex nationally. In addition to national commitments, the contri bution by Apex clubs to the forgotten people in their own communities continues. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) was recently presented with a fac simile cheque for some $8m representing the con tribution of Apex clubs to the Australian com munity in the past 1 2 months. This is a contribution not just in money but in time and community work. I mentioned before that there are very few communities in this country without an Apex club. Indeed, throughout its 50 years of existence the strength of Apex has been outside the metropolitan areas, in the many far-flung centres of population scattered across this country. I mention, for instance, the town of Tullamore in New South Wales with a population of 300 and an Apex club of some 30 members. This small club in a small community recently built a $ 1 00,000 nursing home.
Perhaps the greatest contribution of Apex in its 50 years of service to the community lies in citi zenship. The oganisation has as one of its ideals, 'to develop by example a more intelligent and ag gressive citizenship'. We in Parliament should be pleased to have in our communities an organis ation that seeks to raise the awareness and interest of those we represent. Some 1 .5 million young men have passed through Apex ranks since its inception. It is not surprising that a great many of our local, State and federal representatives have received motivation in this organisation. I know that there are a number of Ministers of the Crown, both State and Federal, from all parts of the political spectrum who are proud to have worn the triangular badge of Apex. As Apexians around the country celebrate the fiftieth birthday of their organisation and as they prepare for their golden jubilee convention in Geelong at Easter to be attended by three founders of Apex and by His Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, I am sure that this House would want to pass on its thanks for the contributions of Apex until now, its con gratulations on attaining the half century mark and its best wishes for the next 50 years.
Mr JARMAN (Deakin) ( 10.49 ) -1 was amazed to hear tonight the honourable member for Melbourne (Mr Innes) say in the adjournment debate that the Hamer Government owed the Myer Emporium Ltd of Melbourne a debt. He went on ad infinitum about the Hamer Govern ment's wanting to put trams down Lonsdale

Street-something of which I have never heard and to close off a mall in Bourke Street because it would help Myers and because Myers supports the Liberal Party. The memory of the honourable member for Melbourne must be terribly short; has he forgotten the time when the then chairman of directors of Myers went public by putting his name on a full page advertisement i n the national Press supporting the Labor Party in the infamous Whitlam area? This advertisement asked people to vote for the Whitlam Opposition. This is a mat ter of history and does not have to be proven. If the honourable member thinks that the Liberal Party owes Ken Myer a debt, he is completely wrong. If any party owes him a debt it is the Labor Party, because Ken Myer helped put the Whitlam Government into office.
Let us get the facts straight. The Liberal Party and the Liberal Government in Victoria owe Myers nothing; it is the Labor Party which has a debt to pay to Ken Myer but, of course, it is not in the position to repay at the moment. The honour able member for Melbourne should get his facts right. The case which he has made in this debate tonight is completely discredited as are most of the statements that the honourable member makes in this House.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) ( 10.52)-1 raise a mat ter of some concern to me. A former member of the Defence Force whom I will not name in this debate-the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) is aware of his name-has written to me and the Minister drawing attention to what is a serious anomaly in the provisions of the Defence Forces Retirement Benefit Act. The member concerned served during the Second World War with the Australian forces. He married-I think for a sec ond time but that is not relevant-in 1967. If he dies, and he is obviously of reasonable age, his wife will not have a right to a continuation of his DFRB pension. The anomaly is that under all other pension schemes for Government em ployees of which I am aware, provided a person has been married for an acceptable period, the pension carries on and the widow is entitled to a pension. Certainly under the existing Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Scheme for servicemen a widow in exactly the same circum stances whose husband has died is entitled to re ceive his pension.
I raise this anomaly in the House because unless it is raised it will go on for years and a few people will be disadvantaged. Most superannuation schemes have provisions which protect the scheme against marriages of convenience under taken in order to benefit financially a woman

!

800 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1 98 1

A djournment

whose husband's life expectancy might be ex tremely short. This obviously can not be the case with a marriage which took place in 1 967, nearly 1 4 years ago. I hope that members of the Govern ment's welfare committee will consider this prob lem to see whether some action should be taken to correct it and to ensure that a person is not disad vantaged because of an existing or continuing anomaly, especially when the scheme is substan tially out of line with other superannuation schemes for government employees which this Parliament has introduced.
Earlier we heard the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) make his now regular tirades against anything which is done to benefit employees. I can understand his attitude. He is one of those people who believe-I think sincerely-that if you can get it it is yours and bad luck for the bloke who cannot. He said in this House in his maiden speech that the strong should get all and bad luck for the weak. He did not use those words but that is what he meant. Honour able members ought to realise that superannu ation is not available to many people in the work force, nor is any other means by which they can ensure their retirement. This affects especially those people who transfer regularly from job to job because of necessity. Any effort to allow people to help themselves to ensure against their retirement must surely be encouraged by all people in this House.
Certainly the Australian Council of Trade Unions is endeavouring to cover those people in the work force who can get cover in no other way. It is important that encouragement of this system, which is the basis of Sweden's social security sys tem which is privately operated, should come from members in this House. There are too many fly by night superannuation schemes in too many industries-I do not hear members opposite complaining about them-in which employees' moneys are capital for the company and they rarely get any return.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) ( 10.55)-First of all tonight, I join the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free) this evening and last night . the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braith waite) in congratulating the Apex movement in Australia on its fiftieth anniversary. I must say how pleased I was to join several other members of this House in encouraging the former Minister for Post and Telecommunications to convince

Australia Post to change its mind when it decided not to issue a stamp to celebrate the anniversary.
I would like now, in a slightly calmer atmos phere than last night, to raise questions relating to the real role of the Labor and present govern ments in the provision of financial assistance to the aged. In a very short speech last night, I responded angrily to suggestions from the honour able member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) that I was a shonky figure manipulator. All I really want to do is to dramatise my interpretation of the figures without involving myself, I hope, in any conflict with the honourable member for Bonython because it seems to me that some obvi ous things appear from the figures. If we take the figures used by the honourable member for Bonython, which were derived from the assump tion of a trend and were not necessarily official figures, and recognising that I based my comments on the only official figures available, we find that between 1 975-76, the year of Labor's last Budget, and 1 978-79-that is, in three years-there was a 52 per cent increase in Commonwealth expendi ture on the aged by specified departments. That expenditure was on programs solely and princi pally for aged people. That expenditure not only exceeds the inflation rate but also exceeds by far the rate of growth in the number of aged people. That appears to me-and I may be wrong-to dis prove the proposition put by the honourable member for Bonython that 'they were not the achievements of the Fraser Government'; in other words, they were not the achievements of the present Federal Government's increasing its in volvement in the area ofaged people.
Perhaps the honourable member for Bonython can explain to me how a 52 per cent rise in three years, using the very figures the honourable member for Bonython presented, represents some kind of manipulation. In a shorthand way, I said something which the honourable member for Bonython correctly picked up. I claimed that the present Federal Government should be given credit for the big increase in Commonwealth expenditure on the aged as a percentage of gross domestic product. I will concede the point that the honourable member for Bonython made that a proportion of the increase took place dur ing the period of the Labor Government. But I stress that a big proportion of that increase came about because the Labor Government gave the over seventies a means test free pension while at the same time introducing a tax on pensions for the first time in Australia. The huge offset of $ 1 00m involved in a tax on pensions was naturally not mentioned by the honourable member for

A djournment

12 March 1 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 801

Bonython. I skimmed over that proposition be cause it seemed to me that that huge offset was a factor worthy of some consideraton.
I had no official figures and I am prepared to accept the figures assumed by the honourable member for Bonython. There is no doubt that the point he made is correct: There was some Labor Party contribution, and a significant one, in that big increase. All I stress is that in increasing that expenditure considerably from 3.8 per cent to 4.2 per cent of gross domestic product, we have not had any offset. We did not introduce any new taxes on pensioners, as the Labor Party did when it introduced a tax on pensions for the first time. Under this Government total expenditure on the aged as a proportion of total government outlay has gone up from 1 2.6 per cent to 1 4.6 per cent. Under Labor it went up by only 0.4 per cent. All I wish to put on the record is that it appears to me that this Government's performance has been very good.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member's time has

expired. It being 1 1 p.m., the debate is interrup ted. The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 24 March next, at 2. 1 5 p.m.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library Mr Humphreys to ask Mr Speaker: ( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the recent
installation of the computerised infor mation retrieval system, POLIS (Parlia mentary Online Information System) in the United Kingdom House of Commons research library, which will enable library staff and Members of Parliament to call up information on a terminal screen or to transmit updated information back into the data base. (2) Is a similar computerised information re trieval system planned for the Parliamen tary Library in the Australian Common wealth Parliament.

802 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 March 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers t o Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

National Water Resources Program
(Question No. 409)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 24 February 1 98 1 :
( I ) Did the Government announce in November 1977 a National Water Resources Program of expenditure totalling $200m over 5 years commencing in 1 978-79, on a dollar-for dollar basis with the States, for projects and programs to which the States attached top priority.
(2) If so, what sum has been allocated in the first 3 years of the Program and what sum remains to be allocated.
(3) Does the Government intend to proceed with the $200m expenditure announced under the Program; if so, what sum will the Government provide in 198 1 -82 and in 1 982-83; ifnot, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National De velopment and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) Yes. (2) It is estimated that by the end of this financial year a total of $76.625m will have been spent on the implementation of the National Water Resources Program leaving a balance of $123.375m to be allocated.
(3) Expenditure in 1 9 8 1 -82 and 1 982-83 will be subject to overall budgetary considerations and the ability of the States to match the level of Commonwealth assistance for approved projects.
Cyclone Predictions
(Question No. 526)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 24 February 1 98 1 :
( I ) What assistance is the Australian Marine Sciences and
Technologies Advisory Committee providing to the Murdoch University, Western Australia or a research unit within that university, for the development of detailed predictive models for cyclones.
(2) What were the results of Project Starmfury with which the Federal Government has also been involved.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Dr W. D. Scott and Dr T. J. Lyons ofthe Murdoch Uni versity, WA have received a Marine Sciences and Tech nologies Research Grant of $1 5,350 for the 1 980-81 financial year for a project entitled 'Development and Movement of Tropical Cyclones in the North West of Australia'. The proj ect is designed as a three year program to improve techniques for predicting the movement of tropical cyclones.

(2) The Australian Government has been negotiating with the United States Government for the conduct of a collabora tive cyclone research program, Project Stormfury, in Australia. Relevant State and Territory Governments have also been consulted. However, agreement has not been reached on the conditions under which the project could be undertaken.
National Acoustic Laboratory: Audiological Staff
(Question No. 552)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1 98 I :
( I ) How many audiological staff in the National Acoustic Laboratory in the Brisbane Metropolitan area were (a) fully trained and (b) undergoing training. as at 3 1 December in each year since 1 975.
(2) Has it always been the practice to count audiological staff-in-training in total staff numbers.
Mr MacKellar --The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-

Year ended

Trained

In

audiologists training

3 1 . 1 2.75 3 1 . 1 2.76 3 1 . 1 2.77 3 1 . 1 2.78 3 1 . 1 2.79 3 1 . 1 2.80

10

8

5

14

1

13

10

4

11

(2) Yes.

Electoral: Failure to Vote
(Question No. 615)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 February 1 98 1 :
( I ) From how many electors in each State and Territory have explanations been sought for failing to vote in the 1980 General Election.
(2) How many electors have been fined in each State and Territory for failing to vote in the 1 980 General Election.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) and (2)-

State/Territory New South Wales Victoria

Explanations sought
1 47,094
95,975

Replies received
up to 6.3.81
84,379
62,856

Electors Fined up to 6.3. 8 1
576
1,653

Answers to Questions

1 2 March 1 9 8 1 REPRESENTATIVES 803

State/Territory Queensland . South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory . . Australian Capital Territory

Explanations sought 70,274 28,404 45,907 6,653 8,447 4,387

Replies received
up to 6.3.81 4 1 , 1 29 20,069 23,522 3,7 1 8 2,276 2,804

Electors Fined up to 6.3.81 358 316 991 47 59 123

Home Savings Grant Scheme
(Question No. 616)
Mr Jull asked the Miniter for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 25 February 1 9 8 1 :
What was the (a) total expenditure, (b) number o f recipi ent families and (c) average grant, under the Home Savings Grant Scheme in each year ofits operatio,n since 1 969.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Financial year
1 969-70 1 970-71 1971-72

(a) Total expenditure
$ 1 2,336,468 1 5 , 1 99,922 17,396,61 1

(b) No. of grants
paid
28,776 34,524 39,630

(c) Average
grant paid
$ 429 440 439

Financial year

(a) Total expenditure

(b) No. of grants
paid

(c) Average
grant paid

1 972-73 . 1 973-74 1 9 74-75 1 975-76 11'997767--7778 1 978-79 1 979-80 1980-8 1 (To month ending 3 1 . 1 .8 1 )

$ 21 ,286,91 9 24,658,242 1 3,163,209 6,574,726 8,334,052 35,045,506 20, 1 89,1 83 71 ,630,880 25,522,279

40,908 40,042 20,836 10,532 13,056 49,452 20,924 60,216 2 1 ,2 1 0

$ 520 616 632 624 638 709 965 1,190 1 ,203

These statistics include expenditure under both the Home Savings Grant Act 1 964 and the Homes Savings Grant Act 1 976, in respect of all applications for grants approved and paid under those Acts, in each ofthe financial yearsshown.


