House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Wednesday, 11 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and StGeorge, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of StJohn of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-Gerreral

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.C. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourgb]e Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members ofthe House of Representatives
Speaker-The Righi Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.C.M.G., Q.C. Chairman ofCommillees and DeputySpeaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen ofCommittees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader ofthe House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader ofthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Lepderofthe Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader ofthe Liberal Party ofAustralia-The Righi Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader ofthe Liberal Party ofAustralia-The Righi Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G.
Leader ofthe National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader ofthe National Country Party ofAustralia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader ofthe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader ofthe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.C. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Goodluck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, W.A. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, W.A.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, W.A.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, W A. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, W.A. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,W.A. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.C.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, K.C.M.G., Q.C.
Spender, John Michael, Q.C. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, W.A. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, W.A. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, W.A. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, W.A. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, W.A. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Goodluck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher ofthe Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk ofCommittees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk ofthe House-J. A. Petti fer, C.B.E. Deputy Clerk ofthe House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the BeefIndustry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tarilf Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tarilf (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 627

Wednesday, 11 March 1981

Petitions received.

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Metric System
T.o the H.on.ourable the Speaker and Members.of the H.ouse.of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petiti.on .of the undersigned citizens.of Australia respectfully sh.oweth:
That the plan t.o .obliterate the traditi.onal weights and measures .of this c.ountry d.oes n.ot have the supp.ort .of the pe.ople;
That the change is causing and will c.ontinue t.o cause, widespread, seri.ous and c.ostly pr.oblems;
That the c.ompuls.ory tactics being used t.o f.orce the change are a vi.olati.on.of all dem.ocratic principles.
Y.our petiti.oners theref.ore pray that the Metric C.onversi.on Act ~e repealed t.o ensure that the pe.ople are free t.o utilize, whichever system they prefer and s.o enable the return t.o imperial weights and measures wherever the pe.oples.o desire;
That weather rep.orting be as it was pri.or t.o the passing .of the Metric C.onversi.on Act;
That the Australian G.overnment take urgent steps t.o cause the traditi.onal mile units t.o be rest.ored t.o .our highways;
That the Australian G.overnment request the State G.overnments t.o pr.ocure that the imperial and metric systems be taught t.ogether in sch.o.ols...
And y.our petiti.oners as in duty b.ound will ever pray.
by Mr Baume, Mr N. A. Brown, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mrs Darling, Mr Millar, Mr Peacock and Mr Young.
Petitions received.
Metric System
T.o the H.on.ourable the Speaker and Members.of the H.ouse.of Representatives in Parliament assembled: the petiti.on .of the undersigned citizens.of Australia respectfully sh.oweth:
That the plan t.o .obliterate the traditi.onal weights and measures .of this c.ountry is causing and will cause widespread inc.onvenience, c.onfusi.on, expense and distress.
That there is n.o certainty that any significant benefits .or indeed any benefits at all will f.oll.ow the. use-.of the new weights and measures,_
That the traditi.onal weights and measures are eminently' satisfact.ory.
Y.our petiti.oners theref.ore pray that the Metric C.onversi.on Act be repealed, and that the G.overnment take urgent steps t.o cause the traditi.onal and familiar units t.o be rest.ored t.o th.ose areas where the greatest inc.onvenience and distress are .occurring, that is t.o say, in mete.or.ol.ogy, in r.oad distances, in sp.ort, in the building and allied trades, in the printing trade, and in retail trade.
'Ahd y.our petiti.oners as in duty b.ound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield, Mr Cunningham and Mr Fisher.

National Health Scheme
T.o the H.on.ourable, the Speaker and Members .of the H.ouse .of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petiti.on .of the undersigned Citizens .of Australia respectfully sh.oweth:
That in view.of the recent standardisati.on .of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect.of increasing the cost .of b.oth items t.o the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily.or twice daily acc.ording t.o medicati.on.
Y.our petiti.oners theref.ore humbly pray that syringes be made available .on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescripti.ons revert t.o 10 b.ottles as previ.ously supplied.
And y.our petiti.oners as in duty b.ound will ever pray.
by Mr B~azley, Mr Charles, Mrs Darling, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
T.o the H.on.ourable Speaker and members .of the H.ouse .of Representatives .of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petiti.on.of certain citizens respectfully sh.oweth:
That funding in the area .of children's services, which has been reduced by alm.ost 40 per cent in real terms .over the last five years, sh.ould be reljtored f.orthwith t.o at least the real value .of funding all.ocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual budget all.ocati.ons in the area .of children's services sh.ould be spent in full f.or the purp.oses designated.
And y.our petiti.oners as in duty b.ound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mrs Kelly, Mr .Les McMahon, Mr Mountford, Mr Scott and Mr Wallis.
'Petitions received.
Discriminatory Legislation
T.o the H.on.ourable Speaker and Members .of the H.ouse .of Representatives .of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petiti.on .of certain citizens respectfully sh.oweth:
That the right t.o w.ork with.out discriminati.on .on any gr.ound including, inter alia, discriminati.on .on grounds.of race, ethnic .origin, pregnancy, marital status, sex and/.or sexual preference, is a fundamental human right; and
That it is b.oth the duty and the resp.onsibility .of s.ociety t.o fully supp.ort those denied w.ork and -theref.ore th.ose wh.o are unempl.oyed as a result .of s.ociety's inability t.o provide full paid empl.oyment sh.ould be guaranteed an adequate income with.out discriminati.on .on any ground, including inter alia discriminati.on .on grounds .of race, ethnic .origin, marital status, sex and/.or sexual pref~rence,.or pregnancy. .
Y.our petiti.oners theref.ore-humbly pray that appropriate and adequate laws be f.ormulated and passed t.o .outlaw discriminati.on in C.omm.onwealthempl.oyment, in empl.oyment .of pers.ons by statutory b.odies and quasi-g.overnmental .organisati.ons, in empl.oyment .of individuals under federal awards, and in empl.oyment .of all pers.ons in areas .over which C.omm.onwealth and Australian Capital Territ.ory equal .opp.ortunity legislati.on sh.ould have jurisdicti.on; and
That appropriate laws be f.ormulated alid passed t.o .outlaw discriminati.on in the pr.ovisi.on .of unempl.oyment benefits t.o all pers.ons with.out regard t.o race, ethnic .origin, marital status and/.orsex.

628 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Petitjon~

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Keating. Petition received.

Customs Duty: Model Railway Products

To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

We are greatly concerned with the high rate of duty imposed on imported model railway and allied model equipment. The reasons being:

(I) There are no local manufacturers of these goods of any consequence in this country, particularly, brass models.

(2) The duty of 34 per cent coupled with tax of. 15 per

cent adds approximately 56 per cent to imported

models. This is putting modelling out of reach of the

average person.

,

.'

(3) If the cost can be lowered it would promote spending,

thereby creating possible job openings.

(4) Modellers are buying overseas by mail order trying to cut costs. This is adversely affecting our retailers. It
also highlights an inconsistency by Customs as one person will be charged duty, while another may not.

(5) In this day and age when people have to adjust to
greater leisure time, hobbies are becoming essential. Lower prices can only increase interest rates in this area.

(6) Models are not toys but exact scale replicas and are therefore educational. They cause modellers to delve into history of construction, design etc.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House urge the Government to place models and modelling equip-
ment under a separate class and discontinue Customs duty on these goods.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Milton.

Petition received.

Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia' respectfully showeth:
That the existence of a system of double taxation of personal incomes whereby both the Australian Government and State Governments had the power to vary personal income taxes would mean that taxpayers who worked in more than one State in any year would:
(a) be faced with complicated variations in his or her personal income taxes between States; and
(b) find that real after-tax wages for the same job would vary from State to State even when gross wages were advertised as being the same; and
(c) require citizens to maintain records of income earned in each State.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that a system of double income tax, on personal incomes be not introduced.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.

Trans-Australia Airlines

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition of undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon TransAustralia Airlines For the provision of essential air services.

The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling TransAustralia Airlines within 5 years is contrary to the national interest.

Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would' inevitably result in:

(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline

services in Australia;

.

(ii) higher domestic air fares.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray th,at the House' of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. '

And y~:lUr petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Morri~.

Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

'

I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.

2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.

3. That the Queensland Government has recen!ly renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.

Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to reFuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products;

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Sainsbury.

Petition received.

Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of warcrelated service by merchant seamen during World War 2:
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrScott.

Petitions

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 629

Petition received.

Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the community of South Australia respectfully showeth:
That the severe budget cut this financial .year of $80,000 below the amount needed to maintain the current level of operations, will drastically reduce the effectiveness of the Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide, South Australia.

That despite ministerial assurances that the College's level of operations would be maintained, the budget cuts will cause the first reduction of student numbers since 1976.
That despite policies of self-management for Aboriginal people, the Aboriginal management of the College and of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit is considered to be under threat.
That the College is not at this time being adequately involved in discussions which concern the evaluation report and the future of this College.
That the indicated take over of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit by the Department of Further Education is contrary to the wishes of the Aboriginal Pl!Oplll.
I,'
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will ad',!ise your department to allocate additional funds to the College for the current financial year to allow. maintenance of the level of operations that have applied since 1976.
Assure the College that it will be fully involved in discussions over the evaluation report and its recommendations before any decisions are taken on the future funding and management of the College, and instruct 'your department's officers accordingly,
Advise the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs that it is desirable to extend fUl)ding of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit for a further year to allow full discussions and negotiations to take place on its future administrative and financial arrangements.
'Ensure that the future of the Aboriginal Community College is guaranteed by a permanent source ofJunding and the effective retention of its management and control by members of the Aboriginal community.
And your petitioners as i~ duty bound will ever pray.

by Dr Blewett, Mr Hurford, Mr Jacobi and Mr

Young.

.

Petitions received.

Aboriginal Community College, North Adelai.~e
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the Aboriginal community of South Australia respectfully showeth:
That the severe budget cut this'financial' year of $80,000 below the amount needed to maintain the current level of oli' erations, will drastically reduce the effectiveness of the Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide, South Australia,
That despite ministerial assurances that the College's I~:vel of operations would be maintained, tl}e budget cUts will cause the first reduction of student numbers since 1976.
That despite policies of self-mal)agemerit for Aboriginal people, the Aboriginal management of the College'and of the Pre-Vocational Training Units is considered to be under threat. "
~' .'~ (

That the College is not at this time being adequately involved in discussions which concern the evaluation report and the future of this College,

That the indicated takeover of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit by the Department of Further Education is contrary to the wishes of the Aboriginal people,

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will advise
your department to allocate additional funds to the College for the current financial year to allow maintenance of the level of operations that have applied since 1976.

Assure the College that it will be fully involved in dis-
cussions over the evaluation report and its recommendations
before ay.decisions are taken on the future funding and management of the College, and instruct your department's
officers accordingly..

Advise -the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs
that it is desirable to extend funding of the Pre-Vocational
Training Unit for a further year to allow full discussions and negotiations to take place on its future administrative and fina.ncial arra,ngements,

Ensure that the future of the Aboriginal Community Col-

lege is guaranteed by a permanent source of funding and the

effective'retention Mits management and control by members

ofthe Aboriginaicommunity.

'

Andyour petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

byMr Scott and Mr Wallis.

Petitions received.

Airline Services
To the Honourable the Spe,aker and M~mbers of the House of Representatives'in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has r~ulted in expensive airfares and poor
service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting Western Australia and vice versa,
Your 'petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and forniulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces,
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bungey, Mr Drummond, Mr Hyde, Mr Shack and Mr Viner.
Petitioris received.
Telephone Services
To th~ Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the ,uea.
YoUr Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMr Free.
Petition received.

" \,

630 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Question Without Notice

Down's Syndrome: Cell Therapx
Petition to the Honourable Speaker and Membqs of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of residents of New South Wales respectfully showeth:
I. The need for the introduction of Cell Therapy into Australia for children suffering from Down's Syndrome.
2. Cell Therapy is only available to those who can afford a trip to Germany every six months.
3. We wish to see it available in Australia for all who would like their children to have the Therapy.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray your Honourable House will consider the above petition.
And y,0ur petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Intractable Waste Disposal Unit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. "The humble petition of the undersigned employees at Government Aircraft Factory, Avalon Airfield respectfully showeth:
Strong opposition to the building of an intractable waste disposal unit in the Geelong District and in particular the Avalon Airfield Area, because the proposed buffer zone inclu\les a working community of 500 employees within 5/8 kilometre of the ,hangar work areas. Also the failure of the E.P.A.. to consult with the employees representatives and the possible failure to debate the feasability of such a unit within the Parliaments both State and Federal.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will intercede on our behalf to prevent any damage to life or limbmental or physical.
" And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY
Mr WILLIS-My question is directed to the Treasurer. I refer to reports that last Sunday the Treasurer personally rang a number of journalists to inform them that he was disturbed at reported statements by his departmental head to the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources on the 'previous Friday and that he had called for a copy of the transcript of those proceedings to study exactly what his departmental head had said. I ask: Is it true that the Treasurer personally rang several journalists? If so, why was he so concerned to give the Press the impression that he was carpeting his departmental head before he knew exactly what had been said? Now that he has had the chance to study the transcript of the Senate Committee proceedings, does he consider his departmental head to have acted improperly and, if so, in what respect? If he is satisfied that his

departmental head did not exceed his responsibilities, will he now acknowledge the impropriety of his own actions?
Mr HOWARD-It is true that I personally spoke to a number of journalists on Sunday about the circumstances that were reported in the newspapers on Saturday. The remarks that I made to those journalists were, in all cases, faithfully and accurately reported. I have no complaint at all about the accuracy of the reports of what I said. The sequence of who rang whom in each case I cannot precisely recall. I make no secret of the fact that I wished to make my views known to the Press as a consequence of the reporting which had been gi<,'en to the Senate Committee hearing last Friday. I do not walk away from the fact that it,was not by accident that the Press obtained a comment from me. There is nothing particularly peculiar or strange about that sort of thing. It is a regular occurrence. I chose my words very carefully on that occasion. I stated a principle which I know is a principle shared by all other members of the Government, namely, that it is the prerogative of Ministers to make policy statements and to advocate policy positions. That principle alone was the one that I was concerned to preserve.
I have been provided this morning with an official transcript of the inquiry of last Friday. I have not read it yet. When I have read it fully I propose, before making any public comment, to discuss the matter with Mr Stone. I imagine that that will be later today. Until then I do not have any further comments to make.
CYCLONE MAX
Mr TAMBLING-I ask the Minister for Communications: In view of the efforts that had to be made after Cyclone Tracy to solve. communications problems, what action has been taken to ensure that the communications systems to Darwin are appropriate to meet any possible need that might arise today as a result of Cyclone Max?
Mr SINCLAIR-I think everybody in this part of Australia shares the concern of the honourable member for the Northern Territory that there should never be a repeat of the disaster which followed Cyclone Tracy's hitting of Darwin and its immediate environs. It is certainly true that Cyclone Max is approaching the city. I am told that my colleague, the Minister for Defence, and his civil defence organisation have that part of the situation well in hand. However, there have been some problems with communications. The Chief Minister of the Northern TerritorY, the,Honourable Paul Everingham, contacted my office this morning to try to ensure that, given the numbt;r-of

Question Without Notice

II March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 631

people who were trying to contact their friends and relatives in the area, telecommunications facilities would be available for that purpose. A request has been issued to try to restrict the number of calls that are made for non~essential purposes. I am told that, apart from the congestion that follows inevitably from people ringing for the purpose I mentioned, the lines are in order and that the Telecom organisation believes that it can cope without difficulty with any effect Cyclone Max might have. One hopes that the impact of Cyclone Max will not be too severe. As one who comes from a drought affected area of southern Australia, I hope that the rainfall that might ensue travels a bit further south and that the good that comes out of the cyclone outweighs any evil.
SHALE OIL M~ KEATING-I direct a question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Will oil produced from Rundle and other shale oil ventures be exported? What commitments has the Government given to foreign participants in shale oil ventures regarding their rights to import Australian shale oil? In particular, what commitments has the Government given to Japanese companies interested in shale investment in Australia and to the Exxon Corporation?
Mr ANTHONY-At the moment there is only one shale project that is being brought forward as a project for a commercial feasibility study, and that is the Rundle project, in which the. Esso company is the major overseas partner in conjunction with two Australian companies. At the moment they are going through their study of this project and we hope to see a commencement soon. Under that arrangement Esso has given an assurance that all the oil produced will be available for the Australian market, although there may need to be some offsetting arrangements for some of that oil to be exported andother oil imported in its place if there is not a suitable use for the oil within Australia. Basically, the production of that deposit will in the first place be available for the Australian market.
DISPUTE IN MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY
Mr CHAPMAN-Is the Minister for Industrial Relations aware that industrial action by employees at component manufacturing firms has led to widespread stand-downs in the motor vehicle manufacturing industry in South Australia and Victoria? What will be the impact of this unfortunate dispute on the industry? What is the cu~rent position of the dispute?

Mr PEACOCK-I am aware that stand-downs have occurred at Australian Motor Industries Ltd and General Motors-Holden's Ltd plants in Victoria and South Australia. AMI, as I recall, has stood down approximately 1,400 employees at its Altona plant and GMH has stood down approximately 3,000 employees at its Elizabeth and Woodville plants and 1,200 at its Dandenong plant. I regret to inform the House that the standdowns are due to strike action by a number of unions-the Vehicle Builders Employees Federation, the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union, the Electrical Trades Union and the Storemen and Packers Union-at two component manufacturers. The strike has caused a shortage of engine blocks and heaters. The shortage of those parts has effectively brought about a halt in assembly production at the car manufacturing plants.
The dislocation and disruption caused to this industry are obviously unacceptable, particularly when the strike action has continued notwithstandingthe Conciliation and Arbitration Commission hearings on the dispute. 1 question the judgment of the union members and their leaders involved in the dispute as their own members are being directly affected. Plants are idle and employees are deprived of their wages. There are no winners. in such a dispute: Not only the strikers but also their fellow workers are the real losers. If the strike continues, quite clearly the industry WIll suffer further damage and more employees will be stood down as other producers are affected. Unquestionably, the union and members on strike should show the responsibility that both the community and their fellow workers expect of them, cease the action and allow normal work t6 resume.
INTEREST RATES Mr MOUNTFORD-I refer the Treasurer.to his statement on Australian Broadcasting Commission radio last night that he had a strong bias towards deregulation of bank interest rates. Is he aware that the Australian Bankers Association has admitted in its submission to the Campbeil in~ quiry that if interest rate controls on banks were lifted bank interest rates would rise significantly? Is the Treasurer concerned that a decision to deregulate interest rates totally would lead to a competitive interest rate spiral as banks competed with building societies and other financial institutions? In the light of the harmful consequences of any such development for living standards, small business and economic ~ctivity, what, if any, is the case for deregulation?

632 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Question Without Notice

Mr HOWARD-I take the opportunity in reply to the honourable member-for Banks to point out that in my view the time for the Government to decide whether the remaining regulations on bank interest rates should be removed or should remain is when the Government has before it the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. As I indicated yesterday, the regulations on bank interest rates are only part of a network of controls that exist. In my view it would not be appropriate to look at the removal of the residue of controls on bank interest rates in the absence of the views of the Campbell Committee on other matters.
In my view, if I may say so respectfully, the honourable gentleman's question betrays a lack of appreciation of the fact that it is simply not possible, in our sort of economy, to pursue the antiinflationary objective of controlling the money supply and to control interest rates at the same time. It has been said before, and ought to be said again and said without ambiguity, that governments can choose to control one of those but cannot hope to control both. Those who believe that governments are far better at choosing the level of interest rates than are market forces have, in my view, been demonstrated by experience to be wrong. It has been shown that the most appropriate contribution that governments can make to keeping interest rates down in this country is to reduce the size of their call on the nation's resources. What forces interest rates up is the response to the demand for funds, and governments make such demands, in competition with the private sector, as the result of large Budget deficits and unduly large borrowings. It is particularly important, in a climate in which the capital demands in Australia from the private sector are growing at a very rapid rate, that the Government curtail its own demands for funds. If it wants to make a contribution to reducing pressures on interest rates, that is the most practical thing that it can do.
TAXATION OF DIVIDENDS
Mr.CONNOLLY-In view of the advantages of attracting greater Australiim equity participation in economic development, can the Treasurer-advise the House whether the Government has considered removing the present double taxation on dividends? If so, what would be the direct cost to revenue?
.' Mr HOWARD-I and the Government generally have received many representations over the past couple of years, and in the past 12 months in piuticular, advocating the removal of the taxation

of dividend income. Many people have argued to the Government that one of the reasons why there has been a decline in the number of small investors who own Australian equities has been the socalled classical taxation treatment of dividend income. I have to say that the trend towards institutions and pension funds, in particular, taking a larger share of equity in companies has not been restricted to Australia. It appears to have occurred around the world, in those countries which have a more liberal taxation treatment of dividends as well as in those whose treatment is similar to our own. Nevertheless, I believe that there is a very legitimate debate on this issue. There is a very proper view, as is implied in the honourable gentleman's question, that ought to be considered. I know that this subject has been covered in some detail in submissions to the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. I imagine that that Committee will have something to say about the role of the small investor in the Australian capital market and, inevitably, the impact of the taxation system upon the activities of that investor. This Government would want to do what it could to encourage small investors to own shares in Australian companies. That is a very laudable objective.
Of course, if the Government were to move in the direction implied in the honourable gentleman's question, there would be a revenue cost of some hundreds of millions of dollars. Precisely how much I could not tell him offhand. Obviously it is something that the Government would have to think about. very carefully. The Government would have to be satisfied that it would make a material contribution to encouraging small investors to move into equities and would have to take account of overall revenue considerations.- Nonetheless, having said all that, I thank the honourable gentleman for his question. It is a very important issue and one that I believe will excite the growing interest of the Government and of people throughout the community.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr SPEAKER-I inform honourable members that Mr Samana, Premier of the Morobe Province of Papua New Guinea, is in the Distinguished Visitors' Gallery. I am sure the House welcomes him.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!

Questions Without Notice

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 633

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

STATISTICAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION NETWORK
Mr HAWKE-I ask the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs: Is it a fact that a decision was taken by the Minister's Department prior to September last year to abandon the planned introduction of the Statistical and Management Information Network on a national basis because of the impossibility of acquiring adequate computer time on the Public Service Board's Mandata facilities? If that is so, can the Minister explain why he has misled this House on three subsequent occasions-- ,

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honou,rable gentleman is not entitled to put a question in a form that suggests that the Minister has misled the House. He can seek information.

Mr HAWKE-I accept that, Mr Speaker. I will rephrase my question. If that is so, can the Minister explain why he has inaccurately informed this House on three subsequent occasions by referring to the extension of SAMIN beyond Brisbane as being dependent on the outcome of an operational evaluation being conducted in Brisbane, the three occasions being the tabling on 2 December of the Department's 1979-80 annual report, and the Minister's answers to questions from the honourable member for Lilley on 3, March 1981 and the honourable member for Griffith on 5 March 1981?

Mr VINER-I am sure that what appeared in

my Department's annual report was a correct

statement of the situation at that time. As I have

said' to t~e House before, the Statistical and

Management Information Network operates in

Brisbane; it was always intended that it operate

there and be evaluated before it was extended

nationally. It is a well known fact that SAMIN is

linked into the Mandata computer. That was

done initially on the basis that its continuing to be

linked into Mandata would depend upon the de-

cision to extend SAMIN nationally and on the ca-

pacity of Mandata, given the demands upon it by

the Public Service Board and other departments,

to fulfil the requirements of SAMIN. The position

is still that an evaluation of the operation of

SAMIN in Brisbane will be undertaken before

any decision is made to extend it nationally. At

that time a decision will have to be made as to

whether the Mandata computer or some other

computer will be used.

'

URANIUM MINING: BEN LOMOND Mr KATTER-Is the Minister for Trade and Resources aware of reports that Queensland Government arrangements with a company proposing to mine uranium at Ben Lomond could be cancelled if there were a change of government in that State-or, for that matter, in Australia?
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr KATTER-Impossibilities can happen. Can the Minister inform the House what effect such a declaration will have on the development of Australia's uranium industry, as well as many of the workers in my electorate of Kennedy?
Mr ANTHONY-The honourable member for Kennedy is probably referring to a statement by the Leader of the Opposition in Queensland who said that a Labor government in Queensland would prevent mining at Ben Lomond. As the honourable member pointed out, there is not much chance that the Australian Labor Party in Queensland will get the opportunity to stop it. Certainly there is a difference of opinion between the ALP and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. In the case of the honourable member's electorate, the ALP is quite prepared to allow the Mary Kathleen project to continue and for uranium under existing contracts from that project to be sold overseas. However, Mr Dolan, the new President of the ACTU, is doing everything possible to halt that project, as well as other uranium developments around Australia. Today there are four projects under way-Mary Kathleen, Queensland Mines, Ranger and Yeelirrie in Western Australia. It seems fairly obvious that the unions involved in all of these projects are very happy to continue with the development and mining of those projects. I am also pleased to see that the Labor Leader of the Opposition in South Australia is starting to air some new views about uranium. The ALP as a whole ought to review its policy in an objective way to see what can be done. However, if there is a change in the leadership of the ALP in this House perhaps we will see a new ALP policy on uranium.
EYRE PENINSULA: TELEVISION SERVICES
Mr WALLIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. In view of the Government's abysmal record of broken promises, misstatements and unfilled commitments on the provision of television services to Eyre Peninsula in South Australia, can the Minister give any definite information regarding the extension of services to the central area of Eyre Peninsula-an

634 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

area not mentioned in recent information from the Minister's officers, despite certain commitments made by his predecessor regarding this area?
Mr SINCLAIR-In the first part of the honourable gentleman's question I thought that he must have been talking about the last Labor Government because his comments rang far more true of that Government than of any of the undertakings and commitments of this Government. There is certainly a problem in the far-flung areas of Australia in maintaining communications and extending television access in the way we would like. One of our objectives, of course, in the introduction of the domestic communications satellite is to ensure that there is an opportunity for the Eyre Peninsula, and everywhere else in the far flung areas, to receive television to the same degree as do people in the more densely settled areas of this country. I am not sure of the exact position as to translators and facilities in the Eyre Peninsula, but concern has been expressed to me by a number of honourable members who represent that area. I will examine the present position and perhaps let the honourable gentleman know the situation. I can assure him that, within the resources available, it is the objective of this Government to extend the availability of television reception throughout Australia as soon as possible.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE Mr BOURCHIER-Is the Minister for Health aware of recent outbreaks of foot and mouth disease in central Europe--
Mr Barry Jones-You've got it.
Mr BOURCHIER-And in the Labor Party? Can the Minister assure the House that processed food, such as canned ham, from central European nations cannot pass on foot and mouth, bluetongue and other exotic diseases to Australian people or to Australian livestock industries?
Mr MacKELLAR-I am aware of reports about outbreaks of foot and mouth disease in Europe. I point out to the House that most countries in central Europe are regarded as either endemic areas of foot and mouth disease or countries which are at risk from that disease. Australian quarantine arrangements which are in place are based on that fact. I assure the House that all processed meat from central Europe must be canned before entry to Australia is permitted. The cans themselves must be subject to heat treatment capable of destroying any foot and mouth disease virus. Meat packaging establishments

which process meat for export to Australia are approved only following inspection and approval by Australian authorities. Bluetongue, on the other hand, is a vector-borne disease which cannot be communicated or transmitted in processed meats. Therefore, there are no plans to ban importation of canned meat from Europe provided the products conform with Australian quarantine requirements. Australian quarantine requirements have been very successful so far in preventing the entry of these devastating diseases.
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT Dr THEOPHANODS-I ask the Prime Minister: In view of statements by Government Ministers that the Government is actively considering the removal of the payment of the unemployment benefit from people under 18 years of agestatement.s which have created great anxiety within the Australian community~will he explain which of the Government's policies in the recent election gave it a democratic mandate to put forward this outrageous proposal? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think that the honourable gentleman totally misunderstands the objective of the Government. The last Schools Commission report drew attention to the fact that the majority of Australian school children go through secondary schools with curricula and courses unsuited to their needs and talents, leading to a sense of frustration and failure not so much of the student but more of the school failing the student. This was very plain in the Schools Commission report. The report was referring to the education of 16-year-olds and 17-year-olds in particular. It pointed out that schools are all right for those who are going on to universities or colleges but not for a large part of the remaining school population. The report also pointed out that a large part of thqse who are not academically minded leave school at the age of 15 or 16 yearswith a sense of failure and frustration, which probably becomes greatly compounded with the difficulties of getting a job at present. The Government is looking to see whether, in cooperation with education authorities and State governments, something much better cannot be offered to those young Australians. The school to work transition programs which we began to introduce a considerable time ago are a step in that direction, but the Government believes that much more could be done. With the States and the state school systems that are primarily responsible-because most of the children are in those systems-we are now conducting discussions to see whether more vocationally orientated courses and curricula can be introduced that

Questions Without Notice

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 635

will suit the talents and the inclinations of the young Australian men and women who, at the moment, get no real satisfaction out of the present school courses and curricula.

If the circumstance is established in which courses are available for the 16-year-olds and the 17-year-olds which suit their talents and capacities and which will enable them to become much better equipped to compete for available jobs and to lead more satisfying lives thereafter, then there is the very real question of whether unemployment benefits should still be available, having in mind that the examination is also encompassing the relevance and adequacy of allowances for low income families. I was the Minister for Education when the secondary allowance scheme was introduced, so I am well aware of the problems encountered by a number of families in keeping students at school up to the last couple of years of secondary school. The relevance of those allowances is also part of the examination.

If the allowances are adequate, and if the

courses are available to keep these children at

school and in courses that suit their talents and

needs, is it really doing them a service-I ask the

honourable gentleman to ask himself this in all

fairness to the young people involved-to leave

the option open of going on the dole at the age of

15 years? That is a very real question for parents,

for this Parliament and for the whole community.

But it comes at the end of the track, once the

courses have been established and once the living

allowances have been examined.

.,,'

NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
Mr BURR-I refer the Minister for Transport to the Government's announced policy to call for private tenders for the construction of national highways. Is he aware of criticism of the policy by the Tasmanian Minister for Industrial Relations, Mr Aulich? Is that critiCism justified? Does the Government intend to press on with the policy in view of opposition from some State government~? What benefits will flow to the Australian taxpayers?
Mr HUNT-Thy, Government is very concerned to ensure' that the Australian .people get the maximum length of road possible for the public dollar that is being spent in this area.
Mr Young-Build one to Singapore and then we will not need cheap air fares.
Mr HUNT-The honourable member should write that into his party's policy. At least he will have a line. Commonwealth, State and local governments each have a responsibility for providing funds for roads. Therefore, there is' 'an

interlocking relationship between the three levels of government. I think it becomes even more important for each one of those levels of government to ensure that we get the best value for money spent in the roads area. We have spent no less than $5,000m on roads in the last three years. If honourable members were to ask me whether the Australian people have received the full value for the money spent, I could not give an answer. I believe that it is absolutely essential for us to have some yardstick by which to measure the market-place. .
Where we are involved in 100 per cent funding of the national highways program it is absolutely essential for the Government to ensure that we are getting value for the money spent. Against that background the Government has decided to legislate to ensure that funds that are being allocated to the national roads program are, in fact, contingent upon the States calling tenders and letting contracts. I know that Tasmania does not like this and some of the other States do not like it because they are trying to protect their own road constructing authorities. There is nothing to stop the road constructing authorities from tendering for the contract. If they are good enough they will win the contract.
I would like to see the State road-making authorities let contracts for arterial road construction. I would like to see also local government employ this principle wherever it can. I am quite certain that a tremendous amount of money is wasted by local government and road constructing authorities on equipment. I do not believe that the day labour system has worked well in the interests of road construction in this country.
RESOURCES RENT TAX
Mr HAYDEN-Is the Treasurer aware of the statement of opinion by the Secretary to the Treasury in oral evidence to the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources that company tax does not in all cases recoup all the potential tax,ation revenue available to government from resource development and that a resources rent tax is a feasible way to exploit this otherwise untapped area of potential revenue? I ask: Does the Government's refusal to implement a resources rent tax mean that it is prepared to forgo an economically justifiable source of revenue and hence deny the full benefits of resource development to the Australian people?
Mr HOWARD-The question asked by the Leader of the Opposition betrays a mistake about the resources tax which is repeatedly made by honourable members on the other side of this House. Tbe Leader of the Opposition implies that

636 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

the only method through which the Australian community can get the benefit of resource development in this country is through the taxation system. He forgets, for example; the benefits which will flow to this community from insisting upon 50 per cent Australian equity in new resource projects.
Opposition members-Ha, hal
Mr HOWARD-It is all very well for honourable members of the Opposition to laugh at that statement. This Government has defended and insisted upon 50 per cent Australian equity. There can be no argument about that. Equally, the Leader of the Opposition fails to understand the great benefits to the Australian community from increased economic activity which is flowing from resource development in this country. Does he not realise that only in the last couple of weeks we have seen evidence that private sector capital investment in the Australian economy in the current financial year will be in the order of 20 per cent higher in real terms than the figure achieved for previous financial years?
Mr Speaker, I put it to you and to the House that this sort of response would not have been possible if the lack-of-incentive taxation policies of the Opposition had been applied. The Leader of the Opposition and other critics of the Government's taxation policy fail to acknowledge the effects that a resources tax might conceivably have on incentive fOr investment in the mining sector and other sectors of Australian industry. They fail to recognise that according to a number of surveys-reliable surveys, I believe-the contribution towards government, _taxation and other revenues of mining companies in Australia is in the order of 60 per cent, which is not a bad contribution towards the general revenues of this country. They are facts that the Leader of the Opposition an~L other critics of the Government's taxation policy in this area fail to acknowledge. The truth is that the incentives provided through the taxation system by this Government since it came to office in 1975, particularly in the mining industry, have played a major part in the economic recovery which is now unambiguously on the way.
COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT BANK OF AUSTRALIA: LOAN FUNDS
Mr LLOYD-I address my question to the Treasurer. When will the $20m additional loan funds for the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia, first announced in November 1980, actually be available to the Bank? What procedures are still to be finalised?

Mr HOWARD-I can inform the honourable member for Murray that the Commonwealth Banking Corporation has made arrangements with the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia so that the Development Bank will be able to anticipate the provision of those additional loan funds. As a result there will be no undue rationing of loan funds to applicants to the Commonwealth Development Bank pending the presentation of what I imagine will be formal approval by the Loan Council of the Commonwealth's proposal that the additional loan funds be made available. I can confirm to the honourable gentleman and many other members of this House who have expressed interest in this matter that the Commonwealth Development Bank and the Commonwealth Banking Corporation have entered into a bridging arrangement which anticipates Loan Council approval for $20m. Therefore, there will be no undue interruption in the provision of funds by the Commonwealth Development Bank.
TAXATION: TRANSFER PRICING
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Treasurer to the fact that Alusuisse stated to the Government of Iceland the following facts:
Australian authorities agree to manipulation of export statistics. The export price of alumina declared to Australian authorities is not a true sales price.
Is it not a fact that the prices of alumina exports by Alusuisse increased by 54 per cent on board ship in transit from Australia to Iceland? How does the Treasurer justify his statement yesterday that this transfer pricing arrangement was not tax avoidance or abnormal?
Mr HOWARD-Unless my recollection is faulty-I will check what I said later-I did not say that a transfer pricing arrangement was not tax avoidance. What I said was not tax avoidance was for a company to take advantage of a taxation concession deliberately conferred upon companies of that category by the taxation law. I am referring there to the ability of mining companies to write off capital expenditure against their revenue and other revenue concessions that were introduced by this Government when it came to office in 1976 to encourage investment in the mining industry after it had been stopped dead by the Labor Government. The fact of the matter so far as transfer pricing is concerned is that it was intended to be covered by section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Mr Jacobi-But it never has.
Mr HOWARD-Because of a decision by the High Court of Australia in the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation Ltd case about six or

Questions Without Notice

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 637

nine months ago, the powers of the Commissioner of Taxation under that section are nowhere near as extensive as this Government, and I imagine previous governments, believed those powers to be. This Government is quite prepared to strengthen section 136 if it is necessary to do so. A final decision on what sorts of changes ought to be made to section 136 cannot be reached until we have finalised redrafting section 260 because, as the honourable member for Hawker and others who study these matters carefully know quite well, those two sections cover to some extent the same area and it is absurd to be proceeding with section 136 until we sort out the other one.
AUSTRALIAN AIRLINE SYSTEM
Mr GROOM-Is the Minister for Transport aware of a paper by K. R. Mackay of the Bureau of Transport Economics which compares the cost efficiency of our airline system with that of foreign systems? Does the Minister agree with the conclusion reached in that paper that our domestic airline system is not cost efficient? If so, what further action does he propose taking to increase efficiency, thus reducing the cost of air travel to Western Australia, Tasmania and other isolated areas?
Mr HUNT-I am aware of the report to which the honourable member refers. I am aware also of the observations that were made in the Holcroft report about certain levels of efficiency within the airline system. But we should not overlook the fact that Australia has undoubtedly one of the best and safest domestic airline systems in the world. There are those in the community who probably will not accept that. We tend to knock everything that we have in this country. The airlines system in Australia has evolved over a period since 1952. We have very special circumstances in Australia in that Australia is a large country, a country the size of the United States of America. We have a population of 14 million; the United States has a population of 240 million.
Mr Barry Jones-It is 226 million.
Mr HUNT-A population of 226 million. I was only a million or two out. I thank the honourable member. It is lucky we have a quiz kid in the House. We have some very different circumstances from those in the United States in that we have six million of our population living on the eastern coast of Australia in the cities of Sydney and Melbourne. We have evolved a two-airline system to try to ensure that we have a regular scheduled service operating on the entire trunk route. That means servicing many smaller provincial cities and many of those cities that are well away from the main centres of population. We

have had to evolve a system that would ensure that the airlines would have available to them the largest, most efficient aircraft available to service those using the system. Of course, this has had an effect upon the operation of the service.
When we compare the actual costs of economy fares in Australia to those that apply in other cOlmtries we see that our system is not so bad after all. Indeed, it is competitive'and better than most services for the short, intermediate, and' longer distances and the very long distance categories in most countries excepting Canada. The honourable member for Moore shakes his 'head and says no. I would like to incorporate in Hansard some examples that tend to prove my point.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister has asked leave to incorporate a table in Hansard. Is leave granted?
Mr Hayden-Yes, if he promises to stop talking.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Economy Cost Distance fare p~r KM

Short Haul'-

Sydney-Canberra

Lyon-Marseilles (Fr)

London-Exeter Omaha-Kansas

(UK.) City (USA)

-

Edmonton-Calgary (Can)

Medium-

Melbourne-Sydney , .

Auckland -Ch r is tch urch

(NZ)

Paris (Fr)-Munich (Ger)

Glasgow (Scot)-Amsterdam

(Hoi)

New York-Detroit

Vancouver-Calgary

Melbourne-Brisbane

Rome (Italy)-Istanbul

(Turk)

Copenhagen (Den)-Nice

.' (Fr)
Madrid (Spain)-Rome

(Italy)

Dallas-Dayton

LoHngouHsatounl--Indianapoli.s,

MelbournePerth

Edmonton-Toronto (Can)

Los Angeles---':New Orleans

London (UK)-Moscow

(USSR)

F ran k fu r t - La rna c a

(Cyprus)

Brussels-Funcha (Madeira)

Sydney-Perth

Miami-Phoenix (USA)

Miami-Salt Lake City

(USA)

(KM)

(cents)

237 40.50 17.1 256 65.00 25.4 227 65.00 28.6 243 48.00 19.8 248 26.00 10.5

706 77.60 11.0

747 80.00 10.7 690 151.00 21.9

715 170.00 23.8 790 98.00 12.4 687 66.00 9.6 1,379 130.30 9.5

1,371 229.00 16.7

1,386 291.00 21.0

1,345 186.00 13.8 1,376 157.00 11.4 1,374 140.00 10.2

2,708 229.30 8.5 2,689 164.00 - 6.1 2,692 232.00 8.6

2,519 535.00 21.2

2,638 439.00 16.6 2,679 377.00 14.1 3,285 268.10 8.2 3,175 282.00 8.9

3,373 279.00 8.3

638 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Quesii0rl:s Without Notice

Economy Cost Distance fare per KM

Los Angeles-Miami (USA)

(KM)

(cents)

3,762 267.00 7.1

Mr HUNT-I want to bring this answer -to a close. Before doing so I shall give some comparative figures. In the short distance category the Sydney-Canberra route has a distance of 237 kilometres. The fare is $40.50 or 17.lc a kilometre. For Lyon-Marseilles, a distance of 256 kilometres, the fare is $65.00 or 25.4c a kilometre. In the intermediate distance category we have MelbourneSydney and Glasgow-Amsterdam, the first being 706 kilometres and the second 715 kilometres. The difference--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister has promised to bring his answer to a conclusion. He cannot do so while there is noise. I ask honourable members to co-operate to allow the Minister to conclude his answer.
Mr HUNT-I just want to make the point because I am sure that, although those opposite may not want to hear the truth, there could well be other people who do. In the intermediate distance category, the Melbourne-Sydney route, with a distance of 706 kilometres, has a rate of Ilc a kilometre. Between Glasgow and Amsterdam the cost is 23.8c a kilometre. Let us look at the longer distances. The rate on the Melbourne-Brisbane route is 9.5c a kilometre, as against the HoustonIndianapolis route which has a rate of 10.2c a kilometre. In the long distance category, the SydneyPerth route has a rate of 8.2c a kilometre and Miami-Salt Lake City 8.3c a kilometre. I do not think it is a bad old system after all.
AUSTRALIAN FILM INDUSTRY
Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer has indicated that he seeks my indulgence to add by way of correction to an answer which he gave yesterday.
Mr HOWARD-During Question Time yesterday in response to the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) I said that the estimated cost to revenue of the taxation concessions for the Australian film industry was believed a:t the time the commitment was made to be under $10m. I have checked that figure and have ascertained that the estimated cost, at the time the commitment was made, was about $2m, which is well below the figure I gave. I should inform the House that now that the form of the concession has been settled in more detail it is estimated that the cost to revenue on an annual basis will be of the order

of $20m. I believe the House should be aware of that fact.

JOINT HOUSE DEPARTMENT Mr SPEAKER-I underst~nd that the honourable member for Hughes intends to lodge a request for detailed information relating to the administration of the parliamentary departments.
Mr LES JOHNSON-I seek information in relation to the operation of the Joint House Depaitment.
Mr SPEAKER-;-The honourable member should hand his request to the Clerk. If his request is in order it will be recorded in Hansard and I will answer it in due course.

MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND YOUTH AFFAIRS

Suspension of Standing Orders

Mr HAWKE (Wills) (3.7)-1 move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the member for Wills moving:

That this House censures the Minister for Employment
and Youth Affairs for deliberately and persistently misleading the House in respect of the possible extension of SAMIN-that is, the Statistical and Management Information Network-in the Commonwealth Employment Servic~ beyond Brisbane on a national basis.

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion in writing?

Mr HAWKE-It is. Mr Speaker--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

67

Noes

48

Majority

19

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, 1. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, Donald
Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M.
CowBn,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.

AYES

Hyde.J. M. Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.F.
Kalter,R.C. Killen, D.J. Lloyd, B.
Lusher, s. A.
MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, J. M.
Millar,P.C. Newman, K. E.
Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E.

Suspension ofStanding Orders

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 639

AYES
Fire, w.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J.
Hodges, J. e. (Teller)
Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, J. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
BleweU,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Bro'wn, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Cohen,B. Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins,J. S. Dulfy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)
Hurrord, e. J.
Innes, V.E.

Jacobi,R.
Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J.
Kelly, R.J.
Kent, L.
Kerin, J. e.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountrord,J. G..
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L.
Theophanous, A. C. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (3.13)-1 second the motion, Mr Speaker. There can be no more serious allegation than an allegation that a
Minister has misled the House.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is that the suspension of Standing Orders be agreed to. The honourable member for Wills has moved:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Wills moving:

That this House censures the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs for deliberately and persistently misleading the House in respect of the possible extension of SAMINStatistical and Management Information Network-in the Commonwealth Employment Service beyond Brisbane on a national basis.

Those of that opinion say aye, to the contrary no,

Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker--

Mr SPEAKER-I think the noes have it. Is a division required. The House will divide. Ring the
bells.

Mr Scholes-No motion that the question be put has been carried. I am on my feet to address
the House.

Mr SPEAKER-It is too late.

Mr Scholes-I was on my feet before you put the question and you refused to look. You cannot gag the debate from the chair.

Mr SPEAKER-The hoftourable member for Corio will resume his seat. I put the question and nobody caught my eye.

Mr Scholes-I was on my feet, Mr Speaker, and you did not look. I was seeking the call, as I am required to do. You are required to look. You read the motion and put the question.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio will resume his seat and not get excited. I accept the word of the honourable member, as I always do, even though he loses his temper. I will therefore put the question again. The question is: 'That the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders be agreed to'. I call the honourable member for Corio.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (3.16)-The Government is acting in a manner which is contrary to parliamentary practice. It is not prepared to allow a Minister to debate a motion of censure which
accuses him of misleading the Parliament. The Government is not prepared to defend it because it is indefensible. It is becoming a regular practice in the Parliament for certain Ministers, including the Minister about whom this motion seeks to allow debate, to put matters of doubtful truth be-
fore the House.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

. That the honourable member be not further heard.

Original question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

49

Noes

67

Majority

18

Armitage,J. L.
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown,John
Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, 1. S. Dulfy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L.
Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L.

AYES

Jenkins,H.A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountrord, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J.L.
Theophanous, A. e.
Uren,T. Wallis,L.G.

640 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Foreign Investment

AYES

FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

West,S.J. Willis,R.

Discussion of Matter of Public Importance

Innes,V.E. Jacobi,R.

Young, M.J.

Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) pro-

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. 8aumc,M.E.

NOES

Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.

posing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government to ensure a fair and proper return to Australia from foreign investment.

Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M.

Kalter,R.C.- Killen,D.l. Lloyd, B.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.

Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.

Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M.

More than the number o/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian

McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C.

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.26)-Increasing ownership and. control by foreign interests of Australia's industries and

Carlton, J. J.

Newman, K. E.

Australia's vast mining resources is a fundamental

Chapman,H.G.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G.

Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R.

issue that this Parliament cannot ignore, We must have sensible foreign investment. I stress the word -sensible'. We must have a degree of overseas capi-

Dobie, J. D. M.

Robinson, Ian

tal for resource development and an appropriate

Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller)

Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.

foreign investment policy that encourages partnership. It must be a policy that maximises ownership and control by Australians of their own country. Above all, it must be a policy that allows

Giles,G.O'H, Groom,R.J.
Hall, Steele. Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J.

Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. 1. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W.

all Australians to share in the development and benefits of our mineral wealth. We do not want, and must not have, our industries and minerals sold out to each and every foreign buyer who

Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W.M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Viner,R.1. White,P.N.D. Wilson,I.B.C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

wants a piece of the action. Yet that is exactly what is happening under the open door investment policy of this Government and its claque of wealthy mining company supporters. Under this policy Australia has become a fawning and highly

ASSENT TO BILLS Assent to the following Bills reported:

profitable haven for unrestrained and often irresponsible foreign investment. Every third dollar of all company income earned in this country now

National Companies and Securities Commission Amend-

mentBiIII981.

.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill 1981.

goes overseas to foreign boardrooms and foreign shareholders.

Securities Industry Amendment Bill 1981.

The exercise of so-called Australianisation is a

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Mispublic relations myth. Foreign buyers raid the

callaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill 1981.

local share market with impunity, screw the

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE The following Bills were returned from the
Senate without amendment or requests:

States for investment concessions which are subsidisedby the Australian people, manipulate prices to their own advantage and. exploit this Government's supine attitude to proper controls

Currency Amendment Bill 1981. Dairying Research Amendment Bill 1981.

to maximise their profits and evade taxation. In short, Australia is being taken to the cleaners by

Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Bill foreign investors and the Fraser Government con-

1981.

dones this abuse and misuse of the national

Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Bill 1981.

interest with bemused incomprehension. The fact

Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Bill 1981. Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Bill . 1981.

is that the Fraser Government has now adopted a new colonial cringe. It is the sort of cringe that

Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Bill 1981.

comes from being an economic colony submissive

Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Bill 1981.

to overseas boardrooms. The Fraser Government

Coal Excise Amendment Bill 1981.

refuses to face up to the fact that the international

Foreign Investment

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVpS 641

eCDnomy is being increasingly regulated by transnational cDrporatiDns whDse fundamental loyalty lies with bDardroDms in Dther cDuntries and whose commitment tothe national welfare Df hDst natiDns in which they invest is of marginal CDncern. Canada is already the prime victim. A tDtal Df 57 per cent Df its mining industry and 56 per cent Df its manufacturing industry are cDntrDlled by transnational cDrpDratiDns. Australia-I expect to. the dismay Df many-is no. 2 Dn the list as 55 per cent of our Dwn mining industry; 36 per cent of Dur manufacturing industry and 48 per cent Df the services sectDr are Dwned by transnational cDrpDrations. CDnservatively, Dne wDuld estimate that transnatiDnal cDrporations have 40 per cent to. 50 per cent of cDntrDI Dver the Australian corpDrate sectDr. In certain strategic sectDrs the level is much higher-almDst 100 per cent.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard) would have us believe that fDreign investment is all wine and roses. It is nDt. There are nDt all pluses and no minuses. There are SDme very large minuses and they are getting bigger, to the disadvantage Df this country. What benefit is it to Australians to. have the massive share raid which has been occurring on the share markets Df this cDuntry? That share raid is being mobilised by Dverseas sDurces; it is a ShDP flDDr sell-Dut Df Australian industry and commerce brDught abDut by the recreant indifference of the Fraser GDvernment. If one IDDks at the latest fDreign investment figures fDr this cDuntry-if Dne puts to. Dne side the exaggerated rhetoric of the GDvernment-and breaks them .dDwn to. see where the real flows are, Dne identifies a very disturbing trend in this respect. Excluding undistributed inCDme fDreign investment into. cDrpDrate equities in 1978-79 waslO per cent Df tDtal funds flDwing into enterprises frDm Dverseas. In 1978-79-in Dne year-it had gone up to Dne-third. In the first half Df 1980-81 it has gone up to. abDut 40 per cent and is climbing rapidly. These are suppDsed to. be the undaunted, undDubted benefits that fDreign investment is bringing to. Australia.
The GDvernment is selling DUt the ShDPS, it is selling out the factDries and it is selling DUt the cDmmercial enterprises of this country as well as the farms. Australians are nDt better Dff when enterprises they built up through their reSDurcefulness, initiative and drive are suddenly taken Dver by foreign investDrs who. then start withdrawing the profits generated in this cDuntry-previously they remained in this cDuntry-and building up the eCDnDmiesof Dther cDuntries. Let us have no quibble from the Treasurer abDut the extent Df this. Let us have no

fictitiDus assertiDn that the FDreign Investment Review BDard is a hefty balwark against this sort of thing. Since 1976 when the Foreign Investment Review BDard was established under this Government SDme 5,000 propDsals have come befDre it. Only 45 were rejected, much less than one per cent, and over 3,800 of them were for takeovers of existing Australian industries. That is where the bulk of foreign investment is going-to. throttle Australian resDurcefulness, Australian owned develDpment.
. Australians have been denied a fair equity in thedevelopment Df their cDuntry; Funds from overseas by fDreign investor~ fDr projects here have a ratio. between equity and bDrrowings of 2: 1. In Australia, that is fDr. the benefit of Australians, the situatiDn is reversed; it is 1:2. Thatis, fDr every $1 equity Dbtained $2 of debenture raisings is provided fDr fDreign investDrs. Australians hand the mDney to. 9thers to cDntrol theirecDnDmy and to. regulate the future. of the natiDn. The unparalleled profitability Df foreign contrDlled cDrpDrations Dught to. distress any red-blDoded Australian. That is where themDney is gDing. It is gDing out of this cDuntry. They are the peoplewho. are tapping the natural wealth Df thiscDuntry. While the Treasurer refuses to accept the principles which are delineated by Treasury in suppDrt Df a resDurce rental tax, that whDlesale expatriation Df the net wealth generated in this cDuntry will cDntinue.
Before the turn of this century Australia will have develDped into a clapped-out quarry in the south-west Pacific while Dther countries will have built up the strength Df their economies Dn the basis Df the wealth generated here. The latest figures available show that Hametsley Iron Pty Ltd had a profit increase of 175 per cent. Comalco Ltd had a prDfit increase Df 55 per cent, Alcan Australia Ltd 44 per cent, CDnzinc RiotintD of Australia Ltd 49 per cent and so. the record gDes Dn. That is a far higher increase in one year than the mDvement of inflation. It is much higher than with the movement in productivity added Dr any other reasonable statistic that Dne might .draw tDgether. It is way ahead Df any increase in wages in the cDmmunity, yet increases in wages are constantly condemned. These massive prDfits are never the fDCUS Df concern by the GDvernment. I repeat that the expatriation Df our wealth gDes on to. build up the strength of Dther cDuntries.
The Dutstanding example is Utah DevelDpment Co.-an ugly grasping cDrpDrate image, a bad corpDrate resident. It writes the score on cDking cDal prices because it cDntrDls abDut 60 per cent Df all Australian semi-hard and hard coking coal expDrted to. Japan. It is mDre cDncerned abDut

642 REPRESENTATIVES II March 1981

Foreign Investment

tonnage and capacity than it is about the Australian economy and the welfare of Australians. Let me give its spotty record. In 1977 when long term sales were going at a price of $47 a tonne it entered into spot sales of $32 a tonne and immediately pulled the ground out from under the feet of other Australian producers. They had to follow. We lost revenue. In 1978 Utah undercut prices sought from Japan by New South Wales producers. It effectively accepted a price reduction and it dropped the traditional price escalation clause. The upshot was that we lost more income and producers were in disarray and were disadvantaged. In 1980 an 8-year contract was signed for the supply of coal from Norwich Park at a rate which wits'altogether too low and which would conservatively cost Australia $250m a year in lost revenue. The Australian Financial Review was moved to say:
The Utah contract has established the effective guidelines for the next eight years . . . for Australian coking coal. You can't blame Utah. It is here to make a profit and it has done so at the expense of the Australian coking coal export industry.
We can blame the Fraser Government for its irresponsibility in this matter. A number of other aspects of the spotty record of Utah deserve attention. I move on because there are other grim aspects of the activities of foreign investors in this country, of foreign corporations which are not good corporate residents and which are working to the disadvantage of this country's economy, to the disadvantage of Government and its rightful expectations of revenue and to the disadvantage of Australian citizens and the future of the nation. We well know of the outrageous Comalco case and the unfortunate result that came out of the High Court. The very fact that Comalco is prepared to resort to transfer pricing devices to reduce its liability of taxation in this country is indicative of what is going on much more generally. It has set up, as honourable members know, a shell office in Hong Kong. It took book entries there. Twenty-five per cent of total bauxite exports went directly to Japan. They went past Hong Kong but, for transaction purposes, the transactions went through the books in Hong Kong. The price shown as the purchase price from this fictitious subsidiary of Comalco was 33 shillings a ton, but the price paid to Hong Kong by Japan was 40 shillings a ton. That is blatant tax avoidance, and by which company? Comalco. It is 50 per cent owned by RTZ which has affiliates with CRA and 50 per cent owned by Kaiser.
Frankly I am sick and tired of the superficial jingles on television exhorting Australians to work harder, to try harder, to have confidence in Australia and to be patriotic. It is not as though

one can establish those fine qualities merely by putting up a soap-ad man in charge of the mobilis" ation of our patriotic fervour. It is there, but we do not need that insult. What I am aggrieved about is that nothing is ever said about the biggest knockers of Australia-the people in the corporate sector, the people in the transnational corporations who are doing this sort of thing. It would be nice to hear Sir Roderick Carnegie deliberate on this. He, after all, is associated through CRA with RTZ. The next case with which I wish to deal is Swiss Aluminium. In the past eight years it had a trading surplus of $123m, but it paid only $2,000 in tax. We hear a lot about dole bludgers but we do not hear anything about these tax bludgers. It is all very well for the Treasurer to say that the Government will do something about section 260 and section 136 of the taxation Act. It is like Waitingfor Godot: We are never quite clear what is going to happen. It will take a damn long time to happen and when the final chapter of the play is written there will be no finale because he does not know what to do. The Treasurer is subjected to pressures in his own organisation that prevent him from acting effectively to clamp down on this sort of abuse at the expense of Australians. It could have been done a long time ago. In the intervening period there ought to be ad hoc legislative action to prevent these people from abusing their positions and to prevent them from avoiding their liabilities. We have unfair pricing, transfer pricing and corporate tax avoidance.
What I have exposed is only the tip of the iceberg. Of course the Government is so concerned about it and is so distraught at the rewards that it is picking up that it has provided a 20 per cent diminishing value write-off for specified capital expenditure for the mining industry. It is a golden tax handshake, but it is not fair to the Australian manufacturing industry. At Question Time the Treasurer likes to give us little homilies on elementary economics that he picked up from a 1933 edition of a high school text book. He said that one cannot rig the price of money and regulate the level of money at the same time. The Opposition is glad that he has discovered this. It is a shame that it took him so long to discover it. The fact is that he ought to know-he would recognise it if he read the Treasury submission to the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources which is inquiring into the aluminium industrythat one cannot provide that sort of benefit to one area and not to another area without creating an enormous distortion in the economy.
The issue of resource use misallocation, corporate subsidies being extracted from the States in

Foreign Investment-

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES ' 643

the most uncouth, unfair manner, the cavalier exploitation of State difference and national government indifference by transnational corporations in this country has reached a scandalous level. The corporations extract huge concessions which are nothing more than subsidies at the expense of the domestic, the permanent, the Australian community. Let me quote the sources for that. The London Economist, sneering at the administration of this country, on 7 February stated:
In Western Australia, say critics, the electricity rates now being offered by the government are less than two cents a kilowatL This would be below production cost, and amount to an A$19.5m subsidy each year to a single smelter.
Dr Swan, in his paper on the same subject, points out that the power costs at Portland imply a subsidy of $2,520m for the 30-year life of the Loy Yang power station. The fact is that Alcoa will get electricity at 23 per cent of the cost to the average commercial user at much less than the average household will pay and at below cost of production. I want to stress yet again that it is the absolute responsibility of the national Government to protect' the interests of all Australians. Our minerals belong to all Australians, not just to some. In this regard only the national Government can ensure that all people in this country, all families, share equally in the exploitation of our national resources. Australian equity requirements must apply to all foreign investment. We must set firm Australianisation targets which foreign corporations in this country cannot be allowed to manipulate or to avoid. We have to establish a resource development fund to allow all Australian citizens to share in the development of our minerals through the purchase of units in the funds. We must widen the powers of the Foreign Investment Review Board. We must use our export controls and foreign investment controls and Australian Loan Council Authorities for a better deal.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.41)-1 was rather disappointed with the contribution made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) today. I was expecting a somewhat more penetrating analysis of what was wrong with the foreign investment policy of this Government. I was expecting him to spend his 15 minutes developing a case which established that a policy which we introduced in 1976 and which has won a wide measure of support throughout the community-including on occasions expressions of bipartisan support from Opposition spokesmen, including the Leader' of the Opposition, and certainly on occasions the honourable member for

Blaxland (Mr Keating)-had gone wrong. Instead, we were treated to a fairly flamboyant criticism of one or two companies that appear to be the favourite whipping boys of the Oppos'itionthe Utah company, to name one of them-and a rehash of some rhetoric which we used to hear from members of the Australian Labor Party a few years ago, but which we have not heard for a while. If the speech of the Leader of the Opposition today is any guide, it looks as though we will start hearing it again, because all of a sudden the Leader of the Opposition and some of his colleagues have lighted upon the transfer pricing and section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, as though the abuse of transfer pricing by the company in question is something that has given them a peg on which to hang their hats and given them something with which to criticise the Government.
The fact is that it was the Fraser Government which took away the major taxation advantage of the Utah company, which the Leader of the Opposition cites as his prime example of open ~l}try to foreign companies in this. country. It was the Fraser Government that in 1978introduced a branch profits tax and took away the advantage enjoyed by overseas companies that operated in Australia through a branch arid not through a subsidiary. That had not been done by the Labor Government when it was in power. What we have heard today is typical of the rhetoric from the members of the Labor Party on these things: When in office do nothing; when in Opposition criticise the Government for not doing more. The first point I make in reply to the Leader of the Opposition is that, in terms of doing something to withdraw unfair taxation advantag(!s, it was this Government which removed that advantage which the Utah company had. Anybody who makes a fair analysis of the contribution by way of taxation, royalties and other charges by the Utah company to the revenues of the Commonwealth and of the Queensland Government would find that between 57 per cent and 65 per cent of the operating profit of that company goes in taxation royalties and charges. Is that a rip-off of the Australian people? Does that constitute a sellout by the Commonwealth Government of its responsibilities? Of course it does not. Yet the Leader of the Opposition comes into this House and parades the Labor Party slogans of the late 1960s about foreign investment.
The Leader of the Opposition talks about transfer pricing. I am very conscious of the implications of the decisions of the High Court of Australia in the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case. On that occasion the High Court

644 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Foreign Investment

held that the powers of the C.ommissioner of Taxati.on t.o fix an arm's-length price, when he believed circumstances demanded that it be fixed, were far less extensive than had previ.ously been believed. I was disapp.ointed with that decisi.on, but like any decisi.on of the C.ourt it is naturally binding upon the G.overnment as -it is upon any .other citizen of the country. The Government has been giving considerati.on to further amendments t.o secti.on 136 that might be necessary t.o remedy the defect apparently thr.own up by the High C.ourt decision.
As I explained in Questi.on Time, s.ome .of the ground that might be covered by amendments t.o section 136 will be covered by the changes to section 260. Once again, it is all very well for the Leader of the Opposition t.o say that section 260 sh.ould have been .on the statute books before. .If he really understood the thread .of reas.oning that has gone through the decisions .of the High C.ourt in regard t.o secti.on 260 .over the years, he would understand that it is no easy matter to frame a secti.on 260 that achieves the twin purposes .of being an effective general anti-avoidance secti.on and at the same time not getting in the 'way .of nQrmal business and commercial trimsa~ti.ons'. Or perhaps the hon.ourable member d.oes not mind if it d.oes get in the way of normal busines's'a~d c.ommercial transacti.ons, because the truth is that .this Government has an obligation n.ot .ol,1ly t.o stamp' .on tax av.oidance but als.o, in s.o d.oing, n.ot to get'in the way of productive, n.ormal commercial activities in the Australian business c.ommunity. The pr.ocesses required t.o bring a new section 260 -.on t.o the statute book are n.ow very well advanced. It is my hope that the secti.on can be presented t.o
this Parliament f.or comment and f.or passage be-
f.ore very long. It will represent a further earnest .of this Government's l.ong rec.ord .of d.oing s.omething as .opposed t.o huffing and puffing about the subject of tax av.oidance, because it is this G.overnment that has the runs on the b.oard. It is this Government that has done c.onstructive things. It has been prepared t.o recognise the threat t.o revenue and to the equity .of the tax system represented by the practices of those who w.ould seek t.o shift their .obligations f.or taxation on to other members of the c.ommunity.
I agree with the .opening remarks made by the Leader .of the Opposition when he said that this c.ountry demands a sensible .overseas investment policy. That, I put to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, is precisely what this Government has given t.o Australia since 1976. We introduced a f.oreign investment policy which sought t.o achieve that allimp.ortant balance between attracting necessary f.oreign capital t.o this country and at the same

time giving Australians a fair share .ofthe development of .our great resources. The Leader of the Oppositi.on knows, as well as I do, that hist.orically Australia has been, and f.or many years into the future will be, a net importer of capital. We have relied f.or a l.ong time on bringing large am.ounts .of capital from overseas because of the insufficiency of the p.otential capital~raising base in Australia. It is a legitimate and authentic part .of the economic management of this c.ountry t.o bring large amounts .of capital fr.om .overseas. In m.ore sober' and candid m.oments the Le.~der .of the Oppositi.on and the honQurable member fQr Blaxlandperhaps n.ot .other members .of the Opp.ositi.onw.ould have us believe that there is a degree, and I stress the .w.ord 'degree', .of bipartisanship in approach t.o fQreign investments. Certainly that was the view expressed in SQme measure by the hQnQurable member f.or Blaxland when th~ GQvernment brought in the naturalisation rult;s in 1978-rules which the Leader .of the Opp.ositi.on a few mQments ag.o was pleased t.o call fictiti.ous. I d.o n.ot think the h.onQurable member for Blaxland publicly regarded those changes as being fictiti.ous in 1978. Perhaps the Leader .of the Opp.ositiQn ~Quld be prepared t.o check his n.otes with what the h.onQurable member fQr Blaxland said.
This G.overnment has been able t.o achieve a fair balance between thQse tw.o requirements. We have put behind 'us the days when the antiinvestment PQlicies .of the Australian G.overnment between 1972 and 1975 n.ot .only stQPped dead d.omestic investment in Australia but alsQ scared away .overseas investQrs.We' all kn.ow .only tQO well the damage d.one during that peri.od when the SQrt .of anti-investment rhet.oric we heard fr.om the Leader .of the Opp.ositiQn tQday held sway among Ministers in the G.overnment .of that time. This G.overnment has been able, n.ot .only by its
in rati.onal approach tQ foreign investment in bal-
ancing thQse tWQ .objectives but alsQ by the way which it has impr.oved the d.omestic ec.onQmic perf.ormance .of this CQUntry, tQ bring abQut c.onditi.ons in whichpe.ople in Australia and .overseas investors want tQ invest in this c.ountry.
The Leader .of the OpPQsition talked about the sell.out .of our natural resources. I invite him t.o l.o.ok at the stand that this G.overnment t.o.ok .over the devel.opment .of the Blair AthQI and Oaky Creek pr.ojects in Queensland. The Blair Ath.ol project is prQbably the largest c.oal pr.oject yet undertaken throughQut the wh.ole .of Australia. In the face .of public criticism frQm the Queensland G.overnment and .others this Government insisted that the 50 per cent Australian equity requirement be-met .on that Qccasi.on. I say again that this

Foreign Investment

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 645

Government will stand by that policy decision because it believes that Australian investors are entitled to have, and will receive the opportunity of having, up to 50 per cent participation in the development of and benefits from projects such as that at Blair Athol. This Government took the same approach to the development of the Oaky Creek project.
If one were to look at the major resource projects in respect of which foreign investment applications have been made and approvals granted in the last 12 or 18 months one would find that this Government persistently insisted upon the 50 per cent Australian equity requirement being met, and rightly so. Australian investors are entitled to that sort of equity. Mr Deputy Speaker, I put to you that this is the balance that we want. We do not want the mindless rhetoric that we get from honourable members on the other side of the House whenever they see a large multinational corporation.
I remind the Leader of the Opposition that multinational corporations are not the only corporations in Australia that can be guilty of trying to reduce their tax liabilities. The Leader of the Opposition talks as though the only companies that have ever thought of doing that have been multinational corporations. I assure the Leader of the Opposition that the predilection towards that, I regret to say, is not confined to multinational corporations. A speech by the Leader of the Opposition that seeks to suggest that that is the case just illustrates how much he and the Australian Labor Party are grasping for straws in trying to rationalise their rather disorganised opposition to foreign investment in the teeth of mounting evidence that this Government's investment policies, both domestic and foreign, have worked. We have been able to create a state of affairs in which private sector capital investment in Australia is estimated to rise by about 20 per cent in real terms this financial year. That does not illustrate a stagnant economy. It does not illustrate an economy which is not responding to the economic policies of the Government. It indicates an economy which is very much on the move. A major contribution to that activity and to the development of this country has been made by overseas investment.
It is always strange in debates about foreign investment that the critics of foreign investment find it convenient to forget the historic contribution made to the development of this country by overseas corporations. The Leader of the Opposition probably does not want to be reminded that if it had not been for overseas corporations we would not have had a. motor vehicle industry

in this country. I wonder what the South Australian members of the Opposition think about that. I wonder what those honourable members who represent the many tens of thousands of people who have been employed in the Australian motor vehicle industry over the years think about that fact simply being glossed over. In debates of this kind it is very convenient to pass over and to forget about the contribution of foreign investment-to forget that there have been occasions in the past when we have had investment in an industry only because overseaS investors were prepared to take the risk that domestic investors were not prepared to take. That has been the experience with foreign investment over the years.
I assure the House that in the continued administration of our foreign investment policy we will achieve that very important balance of creating a stable and predictable investment climate in which foreign investors want to come to this country, while at the same time reserving for Australians and for Australian equity investment a fair and proper share of the development not only of the natural resources but also of the productive resources of our country.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (3.56)-When I listen to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) I sometimes wonder whether he is actually talking about Australia. Many of the comments in his speech were unrealistic. He talked about rational-policies. The policies of this Government are rational only if Australia is seen as a hostage to overseas corporations. It is a cornerstone of Liberal Party philosophy that the market-place is paramount, that with free competition and the natural forces of supply and demand the needs of society will be met by the allocation of resources at minimum cost. What arrant nonsense this is! Such a free enterprise society-if indeed it ever existed-died at the end of the nineteenth century with the rapid increase in the growth of multinational corporations. The ability of the market to perform the social function prescribed by a free enterprise economy has been negated by the pOwer of these corporations. These corporations, many of which possess greater financial resources than some modern nation states, are able to bypass the market in the strategic sectors of national economies. This is particularly so in key areas of policy such as the power to tax, the power to control the supply and price of money, the power to control trade and investment flows, and the rate of exchange.
Let us look at some of the statistics relating to multinational .corporations, or transnational corporations as they often are called. The top 400

646 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Foreign Investment

transnational corporations control about one-half of non-agricultural capitalist world trade. Onethird of all Australian imports and exports is controlled by these corporations. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) pointed out that second only to Canada Australia has the highest foreign penetration. The Fraser Government's economic and business policies continue to make unrealistic, out of date assumptions about the nature of private enterprise in Australia. The Government acts as though the corner store and the multibillion dollar corporations behave alike. A more realistic set of policies would recognise that the representative firm in the Australian business world is a transnational corporation operating in a highly concentrated industry. There is a lack of recent information on the degree of foreign ownership as a result of the Fraser Government's abolition of the foreign participation section of the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Here we have another example of the Government's shortsighted policy of cuts in the Public Service. A Labor Government would re-establish this very important monitoring unit within the Bureau.
I return to the activities of the transnational corporations in Australia and their ability to frustrate the economic policies of their host nation states. It is already clear that the bigger corporations pay less tax than the smaller corporations, proportionate to their size. One study of Australia's mining sector for the period 1967-74 shows that mining companies paid rates of tax varying between 10 per cent and 37 per cent whereas the all-sector rate varied between 42 per cent and 57 per cent.
Australia has joined, with great enthusiasm, the international auction for capital and jobs. In doing so it has been forced to offer the most favourable local conditions for foreign capital. In this respect I draw attention to the aluminium industry as a perfect example of this international auction-an auction in which Australian States are bidding against each other to the detriment of Australia's long term interests and prosperity. The aluminium smelting industry is undergoing a rapid expansion in Australia which is part of a major restructuring of the world aluminium industry. Australia has now overtaken the United States of America as the leading producer of alumina. The world aluminium industry is dominated by six transnational corporations which control well over half of world aluminium production. In assessing the potential costs and benefits of an expanded aluminium industry in Australia more work is needed on the electricity pricing issue. Electric power is the key ingredient in smelting, constituting up to 40 per cent of the

cost of aluminium metal. Competition among the States has resulted in a bidding down auction of the price of our electricity resources. Our smelters will be subsidised by some of the lowest power costs in the world.
Another area of concern is transnational corporations minimising their taxation liabilities by practices such as transfer pricirig. By providing their aluminium fabricators in Japan, Europe and the United States of America with cheap ingots they are minimising the profit base which is subject to company tax. The Treasurer described Comalco and the Utah Development Company as the Whipping boys of the Opposition but he should know that they are used. as examples because they indicate so well how Australia is being ripped off by overseas interests. So I make no apology for dealing with these corporations in my speech.
The case of the transnational corporation, Comalco, which was decided by the High Court in favour of the corporation, exemplifies the practice of transfer pricing. Justice Murphy made the point quite clear in his judgment when he said:
During the tax years in question (1967-71), a substantial part of the taxpayer's product, bauxite, was shipped directly to Japan to two Japanese companies (Showa Denko and Sumitomo Chemical) although it has been sold to a Hong Kong company, Comalco Bauxite (H.K.) Ltd, 52 per cent of which is owned by Comalco and 48 per cent equally by the two Japanese companies. The Hong Kong company was intended to and did relatively little except for book entries. There was no physical delivery to it.
As the chairman ofthe Taxation Board of Review said:
. . . I am unable to detect any business exigency which so far as the taxpayer itself was concerned required the interposition of a company between it and the Japanese customers. Moreover, the decision to supply the Hong Kong company with bauxite at 33 shillings per ton was one which was voluntarily undertaken lind which in my view operated to the detriment of the taxpayer and to the advantage of its parent. I am of the opinion that the taxpayer got less for its bauxite that went to Japan than might be expected, and that in consequence the amount of taxable income which arose from the taxpayer's business was also less than might be expected.
Section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act was supposed to deal with transfer pricing by assessing tax payable by foreign owned companies operating in Australian as if 'arm's length' pricing had operated. But the High Court found in Comalco's favour by four to one despite evidence that suggested that Comalco had set up a 'book entry' company in Hong Kong to buy and sell bauxite without it even landing in Hong Kong. A new section 260 catch all anti-tax avoidance provision could be used to regain the revenue lost through transfer pricing. However, if the Government really intends to stop the practice it must

Foreign Investment

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 647

undertake a study of the largest corporations involved in exports and imports in order to ascertain and assess the extent of transfer pricing and related activities.
I have dealt at length with pricing in the aluminium industry but these same practices are occurring in the coal mining industry. Huge profits are being made by the Utah Development Company at prices well below the long term market price. Utah's first and foremost consideration is always tonnage to keep up its capacity even if it means marked reductions in spot prices and a destabilisation of the market for other producers. As if this were not enough, Utah became eligible last year for Federal Government grant money for developing its export markets. The company was granted authority by the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) to be a 'resident of Australia' for the purpose of the export market development grants scheme. So, not content with leeching huge profits out of Australia, Utah has also received a government subsidy. If ever there was a case for a resources rent tax, the huge profits enjoyed by this most favoured company are a case in point.
What does all this amount to? It means that the Government's foreign investment policy is a farce. In fact, it is worse than that; it is a policy which will lead to Australia's becoming a vassal of the transnational corporations. Increasingly, decisions about the economic future of Australia are being made in transnational corporation board rooms in Japan, Europe and the United States of America. This is the legacy which this completely irresponsible Government is providing for Australians. Let us hope it will not be too late for an Australian Labor Party Federal government to arrest this process when we gain office in 1983.
Mr IAN ROBINSON (Cowper) (4.6)-The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) this afternoon failed dismally to put a case for the matter of public importance which he submitted to the House, namely the failure of the Government to ensure a fair and proper return to Australia from foreign investment. What absolute rubbish!
It is a bogy so much akin to the history and philosophy of the Australian Labor Party. This afternoon the Treasurer (Mr Howard) very ably and very properly debunked the whole case put by the Leader of the Opposition. In fact the Leader of the Opposition put no case to the House. Such cliches as 'Australia taken to the cleaners by foreign investment' and 'selling out Australia' remind me of the false charge of not too long ago by the same party that Australia was selling its land

to foreign investors. A bogus campaign was conducted by some honourable gentlemen on the other side of the House. I remember the honourable member for Capricornia (Dr Everingham) going around and offering to buy back the Simpson Desert with donations from Australians. What absolute rubbish and hypocrisy. We are seeing a repetition of this sort of behaviour this afternoon.
The honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) made a dismal speech in which he gave a miserable outline of policy. The honourable member's leader put no proposition at all and as a result the honourable member had no case even to back up. I suppose he is unfortunate in that regard. The honourable member made false assertions such as his claim that special deals had been made in respect of aluminium smelters. We know all about that. We know that the Labor Premier of New South Wales negotiated cut-price electricity rates for a proposed aluminium industry in New South Wales. We know that he is now taking money from every ordinary citizen in that State in terms of increased electricity prices which have resulted from his deal and from the introduction of a 35-hour working week in the electricity industry.
Mr Milton-What about the Liberal Premier of Victoria?
Mr IAN ROBINSON-The honourable member can talk about the Liberal Premier of Victoria; I am talking about the matter raised by the honourable member. I am talking about the effect that the proposed aluminium smelters in New South Wales will have on electricity pricing. Of course, what we should be hearing from members of the Opposition this afternoon if they are genuine and if they really have a policy on this area-I notice that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) is very quiet on this one--
Mr Hawke-You will not let me speak on the other ones.
Mr IAN ROBINSON-The honourable member had his chance to speak last night. Honourable members opposite should say some~ thing about confidence in Australia, confidence in attracting investment, confidence in building up industry in this country to regain greater levels of employment which Labor destroyed between 1972 and 1975.
The Government's record, of course, is unassailable. Overseas investors are showing confidence in Australia. Figures which are now available indicate a record investment of $2,875m in 1979-80. There has been a continuing strong trend following an excellent build-up. Investors are

648 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Foreign Investment

attracted by Australia's potential and the guidelines which we proposed and which we now implement. The basic element which is so essential is a stable economy. During the period July 1979 to June 1980 no less than 1,10S proposals were considered. The prospective expenditure foreshadowed by the proposals is not less than $S,800m. This is to develop Australia. This is to get on with the job of utilising our resources in the interests of not only Australians but also people around the world. We are not able to do it singlehandedly. We are not able to do it unless we have a sensible approach based on the policies which we are now implementing which require, of course, adherence to guidelines and which require those who want to invest in Australia accepting what Australia will allow them to do.
The assertions made by the Opposition, of course, are quite false. 'If we look at the situation going back over a number of years, foreign investment in enterprise has made a very significant contribution to the development rate of growth of the Australian economy. The significant aspect of that is that it is averaging about 9 per cent of the gross national savings and it has brought with it il very wide-ranging benefit to the whole of the Australian economy and to every Australian. Of course, the Opposition does not want to admit that because it would destrpy its bogyman story. If we look at the Australian Labor Party's policy it is of course a reflection on what might be best described as reasonable common sense. We find an array of proposals which would do nothing more nor less than once again hobble the development of Australia's national resources just as occurred between 1973 and 1975.
Where would the money come from? The previous Government failed dismally either to raise within Australia or to find outside the country the necessary capital to ensure that there was continuing growth in this country. The consequence, of course, is now part of history-the famous loans affair, the collapse of the previous Government. All of this is pertinent to this argument. But it is no real argument because there is no case. The Opposition has not yet recovered from the stunned situation that arose at that time. That is why there is no case this afternoon. That is why its policy contains nothing at all of real substance except proposals such as the increased expansion of the role of the Australian Industry Development Corporation to. increase Australian ownership and control, as it puts it.
The Labor Party is ignoring what, in fact, is being done in that regard. It is ignoring the guidelines. It is ignoring what is the requirement for foreign investment in this country. Of course,

way down on the bottom of the list where the Opposition hopes no one will really notice it too much we have the imposition of a resources rent tax. Of course, this is ignoring what is already being raised in tax from the companies that are operating under the present guidelines which are prepared to stake capital in Australia for the development of Australia, for the benefit of all Australians.
Let us take the great North West Shelf project. It will involve an outlay of something in excess of $S,OOOm. It is one of the biggest projects ever undertaken in the world. Yet the Opposition would have us believe that it could do all this with Australian financial resources with some kind of so-called expansion of Australian ownership. Yet what is the position today? Australia is dependent, if it is to maintain its economic stance without an inflationary expansion of the sort that we do not want, on capital inflow for use in the development of this country. The Opposition is ignoring that saliant point. It is ignoring the basis upon which the whole structure of the development of industry and the maintenance of a sound economy in this country must be based. The Opposition does this because it just cannot understand. It does not want to understand. It runs counter to the Labor Party's philosophy which is so antiquated, so out of date and so patently stupid that the party just has no foresight whatever. God help Australia if the Labor Party ever did have the chance once again of asserting itself on the treasury bench.
Of course, we have to think of what it means when we have criticisms of this kind at a stage in Australia's history when there ought to be a unified approach to the development of Australia. One thing that can be said about the honourable member for Wills is that at least in his earlier capacity he supported the development of some of Australia's vital mineral resources. I do not need to go into detail. He was almost counter to Australian Labor Party policy. To his credit, he could see that the only way we could go forward was to be realistic in the situation which we face. I refer to the total world economy. We are in a difficult period, one in which we need a stake if we are to see this nation in the next decade survive and go forward. It can be done only if we follow very closely the Government's sound approach in this matter. If we do not, if we were to fall into the trap of accepting the Australian Labor Party's policy, it would be a dismal outlook indeed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 649

Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia)-I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Dr EVERINGHAM-Yes. The previous speaker, the honourable member for Cowper (Mr Ian Robinson), misrepresented me by saying that I toured around Australia collecting money to buy back the Simpson Desert. In fact, I asked in this House whether my wife and I could each have one acre of that desert when it was reported that foreign pastoral interests were buying the freehold at 25c per acre. The Honourable Al Grassby assisted my appeal to the citizens of Australia to make a similar offer to the Government to protect the ecology and the Aboriginal land concerned.
The response was overwhelming and thousands of dollars were pledged. The State Government and the estate agent concenled refused to disclose the whereabouts or the availability of the land. Hundreds of cheques and postal notes expired. We contacted hundreds more people who had sent cash offering to buy land. We offered to divert the money to a unique ecological area which was available in Cape York. Our intentions were straightforward. We appealed to the Australian people and did not in any way hinder the development of Australia.
Mr Hodges-Where did the money go?
Dr EVERINGHAM-I just told you.
COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES (REDEPLOYMENT AND RETIREMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL 1981
In Committee
Consideration resumed from 10 March.
The Bill.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (4.18)-1 desire to address the Committee briefly on one aspect of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill. I believe during the debate last night Opposition speakers thoroughly demolished the general arguments that have been put forward by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) and Government spokesmen in respect of the reasons why the House should disallow Determination No. 503 of 1980 and pass the Bill now under consideration by the Committee. The Government spokemen were forced to rely, as their final argument, on the opinion of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack). It is to that aspect of the matter that I want very quickly to address the attention of the Committee. At page 6 of the Attorney-General's opinion he states as

part of his reason that he has reached the conclusion that the Determination is contrary to the provisions of the Act in two clauses. He referred to clause 4(9) of the Determination and compared it with section 9(l)(b) of the Act and referred to clause 5(1) as being contrary to section 11 (6)(b) of the Act.
I want to make two points about that Determination and this opinion. The first relates to clause 4 (9) and section 9 (1) (b). No reasons at all are advanced in this extraordinary legal opinion to justify the conclusion. Last night the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) did his very best to try to extract some further reasoning to justify the conclusions of the Attorney-General but, having regard to the s~ate of the authorities, he failed. The fact is that the High Court of Australia has held that there has to be direct conflict with the provisions of the Act. An indirect effect on the operation of the Act does not produce a situation where the Act is out of accord with the Determination.
That is a very significant difference, but it is scarcely referred to at all in the AttorneyGeneral's opinion. There is a very real difference between indirectly affecting the operation of the Act and something being in direct conflict with it. That is the existing state of the law. It is extraordinary that the honourable member for North Sydney in trying to elaborate his own arguments, and I admit that there was a little more substance in his arguments than the arguments put forward by the Attorney-General, did not refer to the existing state of the law, but simply said that tOlntroduce . a time element-he took the longest time element, namely, a period of 12 months-and to apply it to the Determination means that there is a conflict. If an employee's salary level is affected in a certain way under the Act, and the Determination seeks to institute a time factor, in my view that provides an indirect effect on the operation of the Act. The mere importation of an element of time in the Determination does not mean that the, Determination is in conflict.
If one accepts that view it means that the opinion of the Attorney-General falls completely. As I have said, he took two points. One he sought not to argue at all. With the greatest charity in the world all one could say at best for the second . point was that he made a fairly contentious legal point. In my view one would not have much prospect of success if one had to argue that point before the High Court in the way in which the Attorney-General has argued it. That being so, we are now being asked to change the legislation. We are being asked on a series of grounds to go through all these exercises in order to change the

650 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

intention expressed by the Parliament in respect of section 24. Taken either together or individually those grounds has proved to be demonstrably false and completely cynical.
It is not true to suggest, as the Minister for Employment and Youth AffaiI's has done, that when the Public Service unions sought the Determination ofthe Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission they were doing anything more than exercising their legal rights. He put the matter in a sinister context. As has been pointed out by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), the unions were acting in accordance with the suggestion of the Prime-Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that they should go to arbitration and in accordance with the view of the Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the National Country Party (Mr Anthony) that all would be best served by accepting the determination of our industrial tribunals. The suggestion put before this Parliament that there was something sinister, almost illegal, in the actions of the unions has been proved to be demonstrably false. The suggestion that there was a conflict between the Determination and the Act and that tha:t was contrary to the intention of the Parliament has been demonstrated to be false. There has been no answer on this from the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. When the legislation was passed by this Parliament it was contemplated that there would be applications to the Commission and that determinations could be made when a conflict situation arose. The Parliament itself said that in that situation the determination would prevail.
Last night, we were told that the Parliament should accept without any questioning at all the legal opinion of the Attorney-General in this matter. I think I was being fair when I said that the first duty of the Attorney-General is to serve the purposes of this Government. I believe no serious group of lawyers would regard his opinion as the kind of conclusive base upon which the Parliament ought to be now changing the legislation. Finally, we entered into some of the complex arguments which were advanced by the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon). I do not want to join issue with the right honourable member for Lowe. He has been a member of this place for so long that he has almost become an object of affection. Far be it from me to join issue when he wants to involve himself in what could only be described as yet another exercise in his anecdotal period.
This legislation represents a low point in the history of this Government in terms of its industrilJ.I relations. It does not matter what the Prime

Minister says. It does not matter what the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs says. It does not even matter what the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr ~eacock), who has carefully avoided this debate, says in future. The reality is that the trade union movement in this country, whether it be in the Public Service or the private sector, has a clear demonstration of the political morality of this Government. The tradeunionmovement knows that when this Government says: 'Comply with the umpire's decision' it really means: 'Comply with the umpire's decision only if and when it suits you.' That is the standard that this Government, as the largest single employer in this country, has adopted. It cannot now be heard to complain when the same morality and attitude is adopted by the trade union movement either in the public or private sector. The Government having established that standard, must live with it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr

Drummond)-Order! The honourable member's'

time has expired.

.

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (4.28)-We have

just heard about the fifth dissertationon the rights

and wrongs of (Redeployment

the and

Commonwealth Retirement) Bill

frEommpalolyeegeasl

viewpoint. I think it is time--

Mr Barry Jones---'-It is about a law.

Mr TUCKEY-If the honourable member allows me to contim,Je he will hear what I have to say. It might bring some enlightenment to him.

Mr Hawke-That will be a first.

Mr TUCKEy-It would have to be a first, wouldn't it, smartie.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-Order! The honourable member will address himself to the Chair. Members of the Opposition will Cease interjecting.

Mr TUCKEY-My intention was, as a layman, to try to bring a little reality to the debate. The previous Government, following the advice of a royal commission, chose to introduce legislation into this chamber which was, by its intention, suitable to allow retirement or redeployment of pub-. lic servants under certain conditions. It is not for the honourable member for Wills (Mr, Hawke) or the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) to tell the Government what its intention was. The honourable member for Wills, like myself, was not even a member of parliament at the time, let alone a member of Cabinet. That legislation has now been tested in a court of this land. I must admit that it is a fairly peculiar court in that it also has the right to ignore other laws of the Comonwealth. That matter was fairly well

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 651

canvassed last night. However, the consequent Determination No. 503 of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has been found by the Government substantially to alter its intentions. Further, and considering those rather peculiar rights of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, long-standing legislation exists to allow the Parliament to disallow determinations which are contrary to the intentions of that legislation.
The second part of this debate relates to amendments to the original legislation which are before the House as a result of Determination No. 503. They are not put forward as evidence that the Government has altered its intention; they are put forward to clarify that intention in legal drafting. The Australian democratic process is full of examples where testing in the courts has required parliamentary amendment to clarify the intention of legislation. The amendments before us should be treated as changing none of the Government's previous intentions.
I think it is worth while commenting on some of the more humorous aspects of this debate. Few Australians are unaware of the previous activities of the honourble member for Wills who performed as a number one employee and leader of the Australian union movement. Considering that, the humour of the situation is to hear him argue for the observance of the rule of the umpire. Statements made in this House last night indicate that the Parliament disallowed a decision of the umpire on three occasions over 50 years. The honourable member for Wills and his previous associates ignored, confronted and abused that same umpire on an almost daily basis. That happened during his leadership. Nothing has changed.
Mr. Hawke-Are you going to let that go, Mr Chairman?
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Dr!Jmmond)-Order! The honourable member is not addressing himself to the Bill. I do not intend tolet.him pursue the line of his remarks.
Mr Hawke-I find them offensive.
Mr TUCKEY-Very well. I will change them slightly. The fact of life was, and the previous speaker--
'Mr Hawke-I would like the remarks withdrawn.
.The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-Order! Does the honourable member for Wills wish the remarks regarding himself withdrawn?
Mr Hawke-Yes, I do.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-The honourable member for Wills has been offended by the

remarks passed by the honourable member for O'Connor. I ask the honourable member for O'Connor to withdraw those remarks.
Mr TUCKEY-If it will assist any, I withdraw them. We will look at this another way. We will not talk about the gentleman concerned. We will talks about the union movement with which he had a close association. This morning a question was put to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) on this very matter of ignoring the umpire. To say that the discussion of ignoring the umpire is not part of this debate would be a bit unnecessary considering that it has been said on about 10 occasions. It is a matter of pure and simple hyprocrisy for no reference whatsoever to be made about the activities of others in ignoring the umpire. I spoke in this House the other day about the complete loss of respect that the arbitration system has suffered. Suddenly people with close ties with the union movement are complaining that the Government is not taking any notice of the umpire when in fact it has at least the legislative support to disallow at times and under certain conditions any such determination.
Mr Hawke-You are changing the law.
Mr TUCKEY-We are certainly entitled to do so, and certainly more entitled to do so than a group of people who have no right under the arbitration system to strike. The other reference I would like to make concerns. the comments of many Opposition speakers last night about bashing of public servants. I am a new member of this House but it seems to me that a term relating to public servants was coined by a member of another government. That term was 'fat cats'. Opposition speakers suggested that maybe the Government had some mortgage on the bashing of public servants. I deny that this was either the intention or has ever been the thought of government members. It was mentioned last night that there are some 150,000-plus Federal public servants. The harsh cold fact of reality is that amongst those 150,000-plus public servants are people who no longer fit the system. The law of averages demands that conclusion. When these people are identified it is the responsibility of the Government to remove that burden from the taxpayer.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (4.35)-It appears to me, as I have listened to this debate, that the argument which the Government is putting up over and over again for bringing about this disallowance of Determination No. 503 and amending the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act is simply that it does not agree

652 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

with the decision that was brought down by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The Government argues that the decision alters its intention. The Opposition has put out an argument to outline that that case has already been put to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and has been rejected. Honourable members on this side of the House do not object to reform of the Public Service. That is not what this legislation is all about. I would be the first person to say that our Public Service needs to be looked at seriously and needs to be reformed in a constructive manner. I think we have to get to the crux of the matter. Quite clearly, the legislation seeks to make it easy for the Government to implement its Lynch committee recommendations, to easily sack public servants and to bring about politicisation of the Public Service. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) outlined some of the characteristics of the Public Service in his speech yesterday. He said:
Public servants enjoy many advantages over employees in private industry. They have permanency of employment.
Yet this legislation destroys that permanency of employment. He continued:
Their advancement is by merit.
Again, this legislation destroys that by opening the doors to politicisation of the Public Service. He then said that public servants have a very elaborate and comprehensive appeals provision in both the Public Service Act and the CE(RR) Act. Yet these amendments are about taking away those appeals provisions. The Minister made a fourth point. He stated:
Most employees would be satisfied with this but some Public Service unions want more, almost without limit.
In summary, I suggest to the Minister that what the Public Service unions and individual public servants want is not more; all they want is a fair go. They want to be treated like other employees in Australia and not like second-class citizens.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

Third Reading

Motion (by Mr Viner)-by leave-put:

That the Bill be now read a third time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

48

Majority

15

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume.M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewe" Cameron, Ian Carlton. J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M.
Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges. J. C. (Teller) Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar,M.J.R. MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee. I. M. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury,M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W.
Yiner.R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley. K. C. Blewett.N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Cohen.B.
Cross.M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E.
Dawkins. J. S. Duffy,M.J.
Everingham. D. N. Free,R.Y. Fry, K. L.
Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Inncs, U. E.

Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo
McMahon, Los Mildren, I. B. Milton,P. Morris,P,F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, I. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.l: Willis,R. Young, M.l.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a third time.

LEGISLATION COMMITTEES: ADOPTION OF SESSIONAL ORDERS
Mi'SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.46)-1 move:
That the following sessional orders to provide for the operation ofiegislation committees be adopted:
Committal and consideration in committee:
(1) Standing order 222 be amended to read-
"222. After the second reading, or when proceeding under standing order 221, after those proceedings have been disposed of, the House shall forthwith resolve itself

Legislation Committees: Sessional Orders

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 653

into a committee of the whole for the consideration of the bill unless-
(a) the bill has been referred to a select committee; or
(b) the House refers the bill (not being an Appropi"iation or Supply Bill) to a legislation committee. Such referral shall be on motion moved by any Member, of which notice has been given, and shall be carried without any dissentient voice. A committee may be ordered to report by a specified date.
Provided that, in lieu of proceeding under the foregoing provisions of this standing order, the House may grant leave for the question "That this bill be now read a third time" to be m?,ved forthwith and thus supersede the committee stage. .
Members:
(2). Members of the legislation committee shall be nominated by either the Prime Minister, the Leader of the House, the Government Whip. or the deputy Whip and either the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Whip or the deputy Whip and every nomination of a member of the committee shall be forthwith notified in writing to the Speaker.
(3) Members nominated to a: legislation committee shall include the Member in charge of the bill and regard shall be had to the qualifications and interests of those Members nominated and to the composition of the House. Either the Prime Minister, the Leader of the House, the Government Whip or the deputy Whip and either the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Whip or the deputy Whip, shlill have power to discharge from time to time any of those Members nominated by them and to nominate others in substitution for those discharged. The Member in charge of the bill may nominate another Member to act for him as required.
(4) The nomination of Members to a legislation committee shall be announced to the House as soon as practicable after a bill stands committed to a committee by the House.
(5) Upon such an announcement being made any Member may, without notice, move a motion proposing an amendment of the membership nominated.
(6) As many legislation committees as may be necessary for the consideration of bills shall be appointed. Each committee shall consist of not less than 13 Members and not more than 19 Members, excluding the Chairman.
Chairman:
(7) The Chairman of a legislation committee shall be-
(a) the Chairman of Committees; or
(b) a Deputy Chairman of Committees to be appointed by the Chairman of Committees.
(8) The Chairman of Committees, a Deputy Chairman of Committees or any member of the committee shall take the Chair temporarily whenever requested so to do by the Chairman of the Committee during a sitting of that committee.
Quorum: (9) The quorum of a legislation committee shall be t of the
number of its members, excluding the Chairman.
Participation by other Members: (10) Members of the House, not being members of the com-
mittee, may participate, at the discretion of the Chairman, in the proceedings of the committee, but shall not vote or moye any motion other than an amendment to the bill or be counted fOr the purpose of a quorum.
Minutes ofProceedings: .(11) All proceedings of a committee shall be recorded by
the Clerk to the Committee and such records shall constitute

the Minutes of Proceedings of the committee, and shall be signed by the Clerk of the Committee.
Proceedings in legislation committee: (12) Consideration of a bill in a legislation committee shall
follow, as far as possible, the procedures observed in a committee of the whole with the following exceptions:
(a) Speech time limits (S.O. 91) shall not apply. (b) Any amendment to be proposed to a bill shall be
notified to the Clerk to the Committee in time for the amendment to be printed and circulated to members of the committee before the amendment is considered. (c) The Chairman of the Committee shall have power to group related amendments together for the purpose of facilitating their consideration by the Committee. (d) Voting shall be taken by a show of hands; tellers shall not be appointed. (e) Ifa bill has been amended, the Clerk to the Committee shall prepare a schedule of the amendments made to the bill to accompany the bill, for report to the House by the Chairman of the Committee.
Time limits on report: (13) The following time limits shall operate for speeches
during the report stage of a bill returned from a legislation committee-
Each question before the ChairMinister or Member in charge-periods not specified
Any other Member, two periods each not exceeding-IO minutes.
Report from legislation committee. recommittal and adoption:
(14) When a bill is reported a future day shall be appointed for taking the report into consideration; on then being considered the report may be adopted or amendments to the bill proposed.
(15) A Member wishing to propose an amendment to the bill shall lodge notice of such amendment with the Clerk of the House prior to the consideration of the report; the Clerk shall circulate in the Chamber to all Members a copy of the proposed amendment.
(16) Upon completion of the consideration of any amendment, a motion may be moved forthwith 'That the bill as reported (and as further amended), be agreed to'.
(17) On the report from the committee being considered or on the motion for the adoption of the report, the bill may, on motion by any Member, be recommitted, either in whole or in part, to a committee of the whole or to the <;ommittee which previously considered it.
Third reading. passing. etc.: (18) Standing order 237 be amended to read'237. When the report from the committee of the whole or a legislation committee is finally adopted, a future day shall be fixed, on motion, for the third reading.'.
Essentially, this motion is akin to that which was introduced and passed in the Budget session of the House last year. However, there are two notable modifications. The first is that the requirement for a quorum has been reduced. As honourable members will recall, no fewer than 10 members out of 13 were required in the previous resolution. We felt that perhaps that requir~ment was a little excessive. A quorum will now consist of one-third of the members of a committee rather than a minimum of 10 members out of 13 as was the case previously. Secondly, former clause (9) has been

654 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Legislation Committees: Sessional Orders

removed to facilitate the meeting of committees while the House is sitting. A problem that occurs from time to time in the legislation committees, if they meet while the House is in session, is that members are called into the chamber not knowing whether they are being called for a quorum or a division. This means that sometimes th,e legislation committees have been disrupted. It has been suggested that the Standing Orders Committee consider the requirement for a quorum in this place; However, that is another issue and at this stage the Government is not offering a view on it. I think that a change in the requirement for a quorum within the committees themselves has some advantage in relation to their function.
The original concept of the legislation committees was that they would vary the old systemindeed, it is still in existence-of meeting as a Committee of the Whole. The legislation committee.s provide a facility during the sitting hours for members to go into details of legislation at greater length. I think all of us who have experienced the legislation committees believe that they have fulfilled their essential function of enabling more detailed consideration of legislation while not providing undue pressure to the parliamentary program. They have also enabled far more modifications to be introduced in legislation, in my view, than any discussion in the Committee of the Whole. The system has worked. At this stage the Government still proposes that the legislation committees be established under Sessional Order so that there is a facility for later modifications but it is my intention that we refer the matter to the Standing Orders Committee in due course. If that Committee believes it appropriate perhaps tile legislation committees will be established, according to any recommendation made by the Committee, under the Standing Orders of the Parliament. At this stage there is advantage in establishing them under Sessional Order so that there can be further modifications if they are so required.
I believe that honourable members are generally cognisant of the purpose and function of the committees. Once again, it will be necessary to refer matters to the committees. Any honourable member has the ability to register an objection, in which case the reference will not ensue.- I think that the practice has been satisfactory on the last few occasions on which the resolution has been implemented. The committees. have been functioning. I therefore suggest that this House agree to the motion once more and support the introduction 'of legislation committees for the facilitation of the business of this House.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.49)-The Opposition has no objection to the reintroduction of legislation committees under Sessional Order. We note the variations to the requirement for a quorum and the provision for the committees to meet while the House is in session. We think there is a role for such committee discussion. However, the Opposition is not convinced that the function of the committees has been carried out in a fashion deemed to be satisfactory. As we all know there are good and bad Ministers. Some seem to be able to cope with suggestions of change. Others seem to be bound by the Bill as printed during committee discussions and do not dare move from it.
We all have a contribution to make and if the legislation committee process is to be successful flexibility of approach on the part of Ministers will be needed. We have had in the committees the spectacle of back bench members of the Government agreeing with the Opposition yet the Minister disagreeing because he felt bound by Cabinet's decision. I say this because in pra.ctice the legislation committee system has not been as good as it could have been. If it does not improve, much as we would like to have intelligent dIScussion on what might be called non-contentious matters, we do not see much point in persevering with it. I can understand Ministers feeling not at all confident of making changes without prior Cabinet approval. That is an understanding that we have, but we seek also to have intelligent discussion in the committees. Let us bear in mind that those who elect us assume that in this Parliament we discuss matters and deal with them on their merits. Purportedly we do that but, since the Executive Government now runs the Parliament; once a Bill is printed it is very hard to change, no matter how good the argument for so doing might be. Even Government back bench' members would agree that that is so.
Therefore, I think that there is merit in having legislation committees that can make changes; in having Ministers accept a contrary point of view. Unless that happens I must be pessimistic about the future of these committees. Nevertheless, the Opposition wishes to give them another trial and, accordingly, is prepared to support the Government's proposition.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (4.52)-1 merely wish to make one point in answer to what the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) has said. The relevant question is not whether the legislation committees are as good as they C041d have been; it is whether they are better than that which they replace. I do not think tha,t there' is

Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 655

much doubt that that is so. They provide an opportunity for eyeball to eyeball debate, one in which members of both Government and Opposition can genuinely come to grips with an issue. That process does not always work but at least it does sometimes. The party games that we tend to play in the plenum,. the whole House, are never played in the committees. The legislation committees represent a considerable improvement. I concede that there is room for further improvement but in Parliament, as in other places, progress is more often made by evolution. I congratulate the Government upon continuing the committees.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (4.53)-A problem that I would like to bring forward for consideration and later discussion is that a basic reason for setting up the legislation committees was to endeavour to provide adequate opportunity to debate a number of Bills that were before this House. From experience, although the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) says that what we have is better than what was replaced-and I do not disagree-I would like honourable members to consider seriously trying to organise the referral to the committees of certain Bills at the second reading stage. I refer to Bills that I would class as regulatory measures, such as pop up every year, ad infinitum. They take up an enormous amount of the debating time available in this chamber. Their referral to the legislation committees would allow us to have much longer debates on other matters. I am sure that the Opposition Whips would agree that one of the banes of our job is trying to arrange sufficient time for honourable members to debate what is considered to be serious and important legislation. I refer particularly to legislation which is brought down late in the parliamentary session and debate on which, by dint of human nature, we tend to cut short. It would be better for all honourable members if we could refer a number of such Bills, upon their introduction, to the legislation committees. That would permit much more lengthy debate in this chamber, on important matters.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (CIVIL LIABIL~TY) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 5 Man:h, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill, the Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Bill, the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill, the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill and the Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these six measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (4.55)-The six Bills in the package oflegislation that is before the House deal with the protection of the sea and maritime areas from ship-based oil pollution. The first three implement the provisions of international conventions and protocols to those conventions. These are the Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981, the Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Bill 1981 and the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill 1981.
The fourth is the Navigation (Protectiori of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1981, which contains provisions relating to parts of the three abovementioned Bills. The final two Bills, the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill 1981 and the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill 1981, relate to the collection of a levy on the shipping industry to maintain supplies of equipment to combat pollution of the sea by oil. These two Bills repeal and replace existing Acts. The Opposition does not oppose the Bills.
The first four Bills deal with prevention of pollution of the sea and maritime areas, and the last two with the funding of equipment to combat pollution, if it should occur. The Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981 seeks to implement the provisions of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1969 and the 1976 Protocol to that Convention. The Convention has been operative since 1975 asan international treaty and the Protocol will come into force internationally on 8 April 1981. The Convention and Protocol were drawn up under the auspices of the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation, which is. commonly referred to as IMCO, a specialised agency of the United Nations. It acts as the international governmental forum which debates and drafts various conventions on maritime matters. lMCO

656 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Protection a/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

conventions do not themselves constitute maritime law but the member states of IMCO, now numbering more than 100, base their own maritime laws on them. This results in consistent standards being adopted for the international shipping industry, to the advantage of all concerned.
The Bill requires ships carrying more than 2,000 tons of oil in bulk, as cargo, to maintain insurance certificates to cover their liability for pollution damage that they may cause. It enables shipowners to limit their liability to a rate of approximately $142 per ton of the ship's registered tonnage, up to a limit of about $14.9m. As the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) pointed out in his second reading speech, the maximum liability that could arise for an Australian fleet tanker would be $7.8m. The Bill preserves the legislation of a State or Territory and, consequently, its provisions do not cover intra-State trading vessels. Government non-commercial vessels, basically warships, and Australian fishing vessels on non-overseas voyages are also exempt.
The Bill also provides what appear to be appropriate penalties against vessels contravening, or failing to comply with, its provisions. Ships, including foreign ships still within Australian territorial waters, can be detained-by the Minister until the penalties imposed are paid, and there is to be no time limit on prosecutions.
The Civil Liability Convention, as it is called, places liability for pollution damage on the owner of the ship from whiCh the oil escaped or was discharged. It represents the legal intergovernmental version of a voluntary scheme set up by the major tanker-owning oil companies in 1969. This scheme is called the Tanker Owners' Voluntary Agreement Concerning Liability for Oil Pollution Damage and in its abbreviated form is known as TOVALOP. This scheme still exists and will do until all coastal states adopt the Civil Liability Convention. There are corresponding IMCO and industry agreements which place liability on the cargo owners, thus supplementing the liability of the tanker owners to cover the costs of pollution clean-ups and compensation for damages caused. These schemes also indemnify the tanker owners for part of their liability under their respective agreements. The industry agreement is called the Contract Regarding Interim Supplement to Tanker Liability for Oil Pollution, abbreviated to ERISTAL, and has been operative since 1971. The IMCO Convention is called the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage and has been operative since 1978.

As far as I am aware, Australia is not a contracting State to the IMCO Fund Convention that I have just mentioned. My latest advice is that the matter is still under consideration by the Government. Neither has the Government ratified the international Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships of 1973. Overall, the Australian Government has a poor track record of ratification of IMCO conventions and protocols, and of adopting the recommendations of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation following its inquiry of 1978 into the prevention and control of oil pollution in the marine environment. The Committee's recommendation that the Australian Government ratify the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers 1978 I believe is still unimplemented. My colleague the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) will refer later in this debate to more matters relating to that subject.
The protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Bill 1981 seeks to implement the provisions of the 1969 International Convention relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, and the provision of the 1973 protocol to that Convention. The Convention has been in force since 1975. Although the protocol is not yet in force internationally the Bill provides that its provisions will operate in the case of Australia. The Bill also permits the Minister to take any measures on the high seas deemed necessary to prevent, mitigate or eliminate dangers to the coastline or related interests of Australia from pollution or the threat of pollution by oil and noxious substances. This covers both Australian and foreign ships. In cases outside the scope of the Convention or protocol, reliance is made on customary international law. In the circumstances, the penalties for breaching the provisions or directions appear to be appropriate.
The Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill 1981 will give effect to the provisions of the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil and its subsequent amendments. The Bill will repeal and replace the Pollution of the Sea by Oil Act 1960 and its subsequent amendments which gave effect to the provisions of the 1954 Convention. The two 1971 amendments are of great significance. One provides increased protection for the Great Barrier Reef by prohibiting oil discharges less than 50 miles from the outer edge of the reef. As I mentioned earlier, that too is a matter that my colleague and shadow Minister for Environment and Conservation, the honourable

Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 657

member for Cunningham, will give greater attention to at a later stage of the debate. The other amendment imposes limits on the size and location of cargo tanks in Australian tankers in order to minimise oil outflow if an accident or incident occurs. The Bill prohibits the deliberate discharge of oil or oily mixtures into seas under Federal jurisdiction. It preserves the operation of State and Territory legislation which covers territorial seas and inland waters.
The penalties for infringements against the Bill's provisions seem appropriate. Conformity of the 'penalties imposed by the Commonwealth with those imposed by the States and Territory is essential. I understand that movements towards conformity are in train and I urge those involved to continue their work to enable convictions to be secured where blame properly lies and to ensure that appropriate penalties are imposed. The Bill provides that every Australian ship must carry an oil book in which is recorded all oil transfers, ballast operations and accidental or intentional discharges. High penalties are provided for infringements. No time limit is imposed upon the launching of prosecution. Outside the 50-mile limit the Bill allows for a minimal discharge in accordance with IMCO provisions.
The Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1981 repeals Part VIlA of the principal Act, the Navigation Act, which contains provisions relating to civil liability and intervention in shipping casualties. As the Minister for Transport stated in his second reading speech, these provisions will be given extended application in the Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981 and the Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Bill 1981. The Bill inserts a new Division 12 in Part IV of the Navigation Act. This addition implements the 1971 Tanker Amendment of the Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil, which I mentioned in relation to the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill 1981. If a planned or modified tanker meets the requirements of the new provisions it is to be issued with a tanker construction certificate. The Bill provides that these certificates must be produced for inspectors on demand and that the tankers must be surveyed periodically. Large penalties may be imposed if these provisions are contravened. The power is also provided for the Minister to impose significant penalties on foreign tankers not complying with instructions given to them because they were considered a danger to the environment due to the characteristics of their construction not according with the provisions of the tanker annexe.

These four Bills relate to the implementation of IMCO conventions and protocols which are all aimed at preventing pollution of the marine and maritime environment from ship-based oil and discharges of other noxious substances. The Government should follow these Bills with the ratification of the other IMCO conventions and the full implementation of the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation relating to the control of oil pollution. That is the report to which I referred earlier and which was presented to Parliament in 1978. There is no room for complacency in this problem. In early 1979, in response to a question I placed on notice to the Minister for Transport, I was advised by the Minister that of 230 tanker in. spections carried out between 1 August 1977 and 31 December 1978, 122 cases of sub-standard conduct of procedures or breaches of tanker safety procedures were revealed; that is, there were breaches of the tanker safety code in over half of the inspections carried out. In those 122 cases, 480 instances of deficiencies in performance of the code were revealed. A great many of those deficiencies arose from flag of convenience vessels. That relates to an argument the Opposition has put in this chamber many times-the use of cheap rate, low labour cost, flag of convenience vessels which carry with them the serious impediment of heightened danger and risk of pollution of the environment. Many of these deficiencies were serious and could have led to very dangerous situations. They included instances of faulty fire appliances,. gas indicators and navigation equipment as well as defective lifesaving appliances,flame screens and cargo valves. Such practices, and such sub-standard compliance with the tanker safety code pose a serious threat to all Australians who happen to live near tanker terminals-but particularly to those population centres located around tanker terminals-as well as to the crews of those veSsels.
There is also a grave threat to the environment from oil escaping from damaged vessels in our major harbours and terminal areas. In the period 1 June 1976 to 31 May 1977 almost 90 oil pollution incidents involving ships in Australian waters were reported. Between 1 January 1978 and 31 December 1980 there were about 85 oil spills in Botany Bay. According to the Maritime Services Board of New South Wales, some 309,400 Htres of oil were sl?ilt into Botany Bay in the decade 1970 to 1980. Many of these spills were small; however, the continual slow release of oil from repeated spills in a confined space such as a harbour or bay is still most detrimental to the marine environment. In areas such as Botany Bay,

658 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Protection ofthe Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

which is the home of oyster farms, sea-grass beds, many varieties of birdlife and fish, and mangrove swamps, continuous pollution over a long period will have drastic long term repercussions. If we add to this the occasional big spill, like the holing of the World Encouragement in September 1979 in Botany Bay, when 20 tonnes of crude oil escaped into the bay, then the costs of oil pollution in environmental damage, clean-up costs and civil damage suits are high indeed. Because of the population and environment of areas such as Botany Bay, these areas must be protected.
The Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill 1981 and the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill 1981 deal with the establishment and collection of funds to maintain equipment to combat oil pollution from ships. The former Bill repeals and replaces the Pollution of the Sea by Oil (Shipping Levy) Act 1979 and maintains the provisions of the Act with minor amendments. The latter Bill repeals and replaces the Pollution of the Sea by Oil (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1979. It also maintains existing provisions with slight amendments. The shipping levy Bill provides for a levy on ships carrying at least 10 tonnes of oil in bulk, both in bunkers and tanks, and which exceed 100 gross registered tonnes. The rate is charged every quarter and is set at a maximum 4c per ton per quarter. A minimum collection of not more than $25 is prescribed to ensure that collections are economic. When the original legislation was enacted in 1972, the levy was set at lc per ton. This was subsequently reduced to 0.8c per ton, which is the current rate.
The Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill 1981 relates to the collection of the levy. The Bill redefines 'oil' to include those oils regarded as constituting possible pollutants of the sea. These oils are included in the 10 tonnes calculation. The legislation is restricted to 'oil in bulk', as oil in containers, such as in drums and cans and so on, is not considered to be a significant potential pollution hazard. The Bill provides for the detention of a ship if the levy is not paid. There are also penalties for offences against any regulations. These are set at a maximum of $200. The fine against the master of a detained ship that goes to sea unlawfully is set at a maximum of $500. I suggest to the Minister that these fines appear incongruous compared with the amount that a vessel could be paying if it had not escaped to sea. I suggest that a sliding scale of penalties, equal to the income lost to the Government in the event of infringement, would seem a more appropriate method of determining the fine on conviction.

The Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Bill) and the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill set thelevy rate and establish the procedure for collection of the levy to fund the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil, the Australian joint Federal-State machinery to combat oil pollution from ships. It is strange that not once in the two Bills nor in the Minister's second reading speech, is there mention of the National Plan, which is after all the object of the levy. The present status of the National Plan is of paramount importance to any discussion of the protection of the marine and maritime environments. It is our second and last line of defence against oil pollution from ships if the preventive mechanisms on board ships, covered by provisions implementing various Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organisation conventions, fail in practice. The fact is they do fail and fail rather frequently, so the National Plan must be as efficient in combating oil spills as we can make it. The grounding of the Oceanic Grandeur in the Torres Strait in 1970, when 1,400 tonnes of oil was spilt, highlighted Australia's inability to deal with such problems. It spurred the development of an Australian plan to combat such incidents.
Basic divisions of responsibility between the Commonwealth and States were agreed upon at a meeting in 1971. The two levy Acts which I have mentioned were passed into law in 1972 and became operational with the National Plan on 1 October 1973. The primary purpose of the National Plan, as I have indicated, was to protect the environment. A loan of $lm was obtained from the Commonwealth to buy equipment, to be amortised by levy collections. By June 1976 the loan had been repaid and a reserve of $500,000 created. The levy was then reduced from lc per ton to 0.8c per ton from 1 October 1976.
The National Plan was designed to finance and maintain equipment only for major incidents, leaving the States to deal with provision of equipment for minor spills. To emphasise this, the National Plan will meet only the costs for spills in excess of $500 or the costs of spills requiring more than 500 litres of dispersant. If a spill costs less than this then the States must seek direct reimbursement from the polluter. If it is more than this then the National Plan reimburses the States, on condition that the States impose their laws on the polluter to reimburse the National Plan. Any inability to identify the polluter thus leaves,',the States to foot the clean-up bill in cases costing under $500 each and the National Plan in cases above that figure. As time has demonstrated with this situation, it is often very difficult to identify the culprit in cases of small slicks but not with

Protection ofthe Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 659

major discharges, so there is a slow, gradual loss to tonne, that is, 20 per cent of the maximum per-

the State authorities.

mitted. This allows the three functions of the levy

to be performed-the amortising of the loan,

Notwithstanding the avowed intent of the meeting costs which cannot be collected as the

National Plan to adopt a cost recovery principle of the polluter pays, it 'often has a debt owing to it

polluter is unidentifiable or is incapable of paying , the costs and supplying and maintaining equip-

from the States attempting to obtain clean-up costs from the oil industry. To the best of my

ment. Since 1972 the area of responsibility that has increased most in terms of pollution hazards

knowledge the Maritime Services Board of New and associated costs is in ports and harbours. This

South Wales, for instance, owes about $500,000 to is where most oil terminals are situated, where

the National Plan. That is a matter to which the most tankers converge and where high population

Minister may be able to refer in his response. I understand it is attempting to obtain this amount

densities which are sensitive to environmental hazards, exist. These areas are the responsibilities

from the oil industry for the costs of cleaning up of the States.

after the industry's mistakes and accidents. It in-

cludes an amount of approximately $210,000 for the clean-up after the World Encouragement spill which I have mentioned. To the extent that this amount is not obtained from the polluter then the National Plan meets the bill. It is certainly not a picture of immediate payment.

The States have asked for a large increase of the 0.8c per tonne levy. They claim this so that the National Plan can purchase adequate, modern ' equipment to prevent oil from polluting the environment as far as possible. This would involve the purchase of containment and recovery equip-

The National Plan equipment consists of stockpiles of dispersant at eight centres around the coast and one central stockpile, including specialised equipment. It also owns skimmers, booms and other containing and recovering equipment, which are available to the States. Its mainstay, however, is dispersant. Prime responsibility for action against oil spills differs according to the area involved. In ports or harbours, the administative authority of the port or harbour has prime responsibility. State or territorial authorities have responsibilities for beaches, foreshores and territorial seas of Victoria and Tasmania. The Commonwealth has responsibility for other territorial seas and the high seas.

ment such as booms and skimmers but not dispersant. Dispersant is cheap but is toxic, and oil is itself toxic. To recover oil is thus far more expensive but is far more environmentally sound than leaving toxic oil and dispersant in the marine environment. It is a different story entirely to provide adequate protection equipment to stop oil hitting a sensitive environment than to attempt to clean up after the damage is done when oil has struck the environment. If the National Plan is to perform its task of protecting the environment it must provide this containment and recovery equipment. If this involves an increase in the levy then the States have just reason to seek an adequate increase. It would seem on this evidence to be a valid, practical insurance policy against en-

There is also a close working relationship with vironmental degradation to ask the shipping inthe petroleum industry's pollution combating ordustry to pay a higher levy.

ganisation, the Petroleum Institute Environmental Conservation Executive-PIECE. Through this body, the States and the Territories have publicised a long held belief that the provisions of the national plan are not adequate to do the job. They may have been eight years ago but they are not now. As the Minister for Transport stated in his second reading speech, the Bills before us have been the object of detailed discussion with the States and Territories in the Marine and Ports Council of Australia. I presume that some modifications to aspects of the National Plan are in the pipeline.

At present the States are being forced to pay for these rising costs of protection equipment. The principle of polluter pays is turning into a principle of polluter and States pay. The Maritime Services Board of New South Wales, for instance, has recently purchased four Vikoma booms to protect Botany Bay, Sydney, Newcastle and Port Kembla at a combined cost of $280,000. It would also be useful to provide more funds for the training of groups of full time personnel skilled in antipollution techniques. It is of little use having sophisticated equipment for pollution control and environment protection unless we have trained

I want to outline briefly some of the States' mispeople to use that equipment effectively. If there

givings about parts of the National Plan. I trust is a deficiency in adequate equipment to prevent

that the Minister will later advise us on any spilt oil from harming the environment as an

proposed or negotiated alterations to the plan of alternative to mopping up after the event, as I am

which he is aware. The levy is set at 0.8c per led to believe is the case, then there is a justifiable

660 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Protection ofthe Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

case for more funds to be provided. This may involve an increase in the levy or a more equitable scheme altogether for collecting sufficient funds. Perhaps it could be related to the amount of bulk oil carried or even extended to shore-based refineries if national plan equipment is used in the clean-up following accidents or incidents involving shore-based operations.
The passage of the Bills we are discussing today will be an important step in developing Australia's capability for preventing oil spills from occurring and for protecting the environment in the event that they do occur. The Bills are thus not opposed by the Opposition but I invite the Minister for Transport, in his response, to advise the House what stage has been reached in discussions in respect of the national plan and what stage has been reached in the determination of a more appropriate levy.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) (5.21)-ln entering this cognate debate on the six protection of the sea Bills I want to deliver a mild rebuke to the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) for the brevity of his second reading speech. This is extremely important legislation and therefore I believe there ought to have been more information in the Minister's speech. Of course only the speech goes into the record but there is available a very eXtensive and useful comprehensive explanatory memorandum which goes into much more detail. My interest in these Bills stems from my responsibility as Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. Having been born and bred in Queensland and having lived near and visited the Great Barrier Reeffor many years I have a love for it and indeed a desire to see that damage to it is minimised. Therefore, as it relates to oil spills and the damage that they may do in that area, I have a deep interest in this subject.
In October 1978 the Environment and Conservation Committee tabled a report entitled 'Oil Spills-Prevention and Control of Oil Pollution in the Marine Environment'. There were 25 recommendations in that report to prevent and control oil pollution. More than half of them have been agreed to by the Government and I am thankful for that consideration. Although this legislation incorporates a number of the Committee's recommendations I am disappointed that the Minister made no reference to the report and I cannot help but wonder if it was considered at all in the drafting of this legislation. I sincerely trust that it was considered and that its recommendations and the evidence given to the inquiry were of some value to the Minister and his Department in the drafting of this legislation.

Mr Hunt-It was a very valuable report indeed.
Mr HODGES-Thank you very much. The Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981 implements the provisions of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1969. One of the Committee's recommendations in its report was that the Commonwealth Government take immediate steps to implement this Convention. I am disappointed that it has taken almost three years.
I note that the Minister in his second reading speech has stressed the extreme environmental sensitivity of the coastline. The Committee was told in evidence that it was difficult to imagine a greater or more immediate environmental threat to Australia arising from man's activities, as distinct from those of nature, than that which is potentially inherent in a major oil spill. New tanker construction controls will ensure that the size and arrangement of tanks in tankers will reduce the amount of oil released if only part of a tanker is damaged in a collision or grounding. This was one of the measures that the Committee was anxious to see introduced. Clause 267K of the Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1981 gives the Minister power to insist that foreign tankers not constructed to required standards comply with certain directions. This power is an important environmental safeguard embodied in this legislation.
I now come to protection of the Great Barrier Reef. Clause 10 of the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill provides that ships now may not dump oil within-50 miles of the outer edge of the Great Barrier Reef. The explanatory memorandum accompanying the Bill states that this clause 'will protect the reef from oil pollution damage'. Our investigations showed quite clearly that there is not enough information available on the likely impact of oil on the reef, or of the behaviour of the sea itself under varying tide and wind conditions, to state this categorically. Just because the oil is not visible does not necessarily mean it is not causing damage. Although this clause is certainly an improvement, in my opinion it does not go far enough.
I am pleased to see that the definition of 'oil' will incorporate a much wider range of oil types. It will now include any hydrocarbon oil or hydrocarbon liquid fuel. This will make application of the legislation more comprehensive and effective. I am concerned to read that in the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill certain

Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 661

types of discharge are free from penalty. Oil discharges from non-tankers, tankers on a nonballast voyage, or from machinery space bilges of tankers are exempt if: Firstly, the ship is en route at the time; secondly, the discharge rate does not exceed 60 litres per mile and; thirdly, the discharge is as far from land as practicable. The same conditions apply to oily mixtures, as long as the oil content is less than 100 parts per million of the mixture.
Although on the surface these safeguards may appear adequate I am not convinced that they are. My Committee was advised that frequent small spills do in fact cause more environmental damage in the long term than occasional large spills. Accidental spills from ships actually account for less than 10 per cent of total shipgenerated pollution. It is these deliberate spills that we should be trying to prevent. Although the legislation in this package goes some way towards that end it does not really go far enough. There is a limit to the amount of oil the sea can cope with, and the time must soon be aproaching when we will have reached that limit.
I am pleased to see that the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill strengthens the oil record book system. This is a vital component of any surveillance system and frequent checks must act as a deterrent to deliberate spills. I am not convinced, however, that the penalties for non-compliance are high enough.
The next point I would like to make concerns the levy imposed on shipping to finance the national plan. The environment Committee recommended that the Government evaluate alternative levy schemes to determine the most equitable way of levying ships. The present system levies ships with morethan 10 tonnes of oil on board at a rate according to the total tonnage of the ship. The Committee considers that tankers should pay more than other ships to reflect the much graver threat to the environment of a tanker mishap. The protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill introduces a minimum levy of $25 using the argument that small ships also pose a significant threat and should still contribute on the polluter pays principle. Surely if this argument is taken to its logical conclusion, ships that pose the greatest threat-in this case tankersshould pay the most. I am disappointed that the Government has not taken up this recommendation.
To sum up I believe that many of the clauses in these Bills strengthen the Government's ability to protect the environment from the serious threat of oil pollution. They give the Minister much

wider powers of intervention to protect the environment if the threat to the coastline from oil pollution is grave. As a majority of spills are deliberate, it is good to see Commonwealth legislation providing a deterrent through the imposition of fines. However, we must not be complacent and relax our vigilance, as there is still a lot that can be achieved. I would like to see a concerted effort made by the Federal Government, in conjunction with State governments, to reduce even further the threat to our coastal resources.
Recommendation 4 in the Committee's report dealt with compulsory pilotage for all oil tankers and other types of vessels over 10,000 tonnes in areas where detailed local knowledge is required for safe navigation. I want to direct some comments in that regard towards the Great Barrier Reef area. The Committee wrote to the Minister and received a reply dated 27 March 1980 to this and a number of other recommendations that the Government saw fit not to adopt. I want to refer to the Minister's response to that recommendation. He stated that the question of compulsory pilotage within the Great Barrier Reef area had been examined by his Department and that the advantages and the disadvantages had been considered: He further said that the embarkation of a pilot does not guarantee a safe passage because marine accidentsiue caused by many errors other than navigational ones. He also pointed out that the pilot's legal position is that of an adviser to the ship's master, who is not of course legally bound to follow the pilot's advice. I accept that information. Nevertheless, I believe the Government ought to be endeavouring, wherever possible, to encoura,ge pilotage. The Minister for Transport may answer that that is the case. However, he went on in this recommendation to talk about internationallaw affording freedom to the masters of foreign vessels on the high seas and,the right of innocent passage.through territorial seas. He gave as an example that in some international straitssuch as the Bosphorus-,---compulsory pilotage is expressly forbidden by international convention. Therefore, any unilateral Australian action to make pilotage compulsory is unlikely to be recognised and accepted internationally. He said that in those circumstances the Department of Transport has no plans to introduce compulsory pilotage in the area of the Great Barrier Reef area.
Those honourable members who have visited the Great Barrier Reef area would know how very difficult it is to navigate. It is 'an extremely hazardous and ,dangerous area, particularly the section from Torres Strait to about the level of Cairns.. One can just imagine-apart from the loss of life, which is of paramount importance-tha,t should a

662 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

mishap occur and a large ship or tanker run aground in the Great Barrier Reef area a tremendous amount of damage would be done to the delicate ecosystems of the Great Barrier Reef. It is too terrible to contemplate the overall effects if that sort of mishap were to occur. An attempt should be made to bring in compulsory pilotage on ships in shipping channels in the very dangerous Great Barrier Reef area. Instead, the Department of Transport and the Government are resigned to the fact that this cannot be achieved. I question seriously whether adequate attention has been given to this matter.
The Committee received quite a deal of evidence on this issue. It was told that unpiloted ships stay very close to recommended routes printed on charts, often with little consideration for the needs of other ships in the area. That greatly increases the possibility of collision in those very restricted channel areas. I ask the Minister whether he will again look at this matter with a view to the Government at least requiring compulsory pilotage on ships of 10,000 tonnes and greater. The area is of great significance not only to Queensland and Australia but also internationally.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (5.33)-Generally the Opposition welcomes the legislation before the House which covers extremely important areas of navigation and protection against damage that might result from oil spills. Perhaps it is unfOJ;tunate that the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in his second reading speech made no reference to the inquiry carried out by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation to which the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) has just referred. The Committee carried out a fairly extensive inquiry into the problems associated with oil spills on the Australian coast. Of course, Australia is an island continent and has extremely long coastlines. In the course of the inquiry undertaken by the Committee quite a number of major problems were uncovered and a number of very constructive recommendations were made. Some of those recommendations have been adopted in parts' in this legislation; unfortunately others have not received such favourable treatment. Indeed, it is unfortunate also that with complex legislation such as the Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill and the cognate Bills before the House, the Opposition should have had such little time to prepare itself and to canvass the issues involved.

There is quite a long history behind this legislation and some of the proposals which have not yet reached the legislation stage. A number of international conferences are in the process of achieving international convenants and agreements some of which are quite closely related to the legislation before the House. To my knowledge the Parliament has never been briefed in relation to these discussions and negotiations. Most honourable members of the Parliament would be totally unaware of the various conventions which are at different stages of international acceptance. That is very unfortunate. It is unfortunate also that we have not been made sufficiently aware of the scale and dimensions of the problems associated with international shipping and, particularly, tanker shipping in the age of the supertanker.
Whilst I am aware that so-called supertankers do not visit Australian ports at present, nevertheless, as Australia needs to import more and more of its oil resources we can expect much larger ships to visit this country. One can only. be very concerned at the number of major calamities that have occurred over the past year or so. For example, in January 1979 50 men died when the oil tanker Betelgeuse exploded in Bantry Bay, Ireland, while unloading 100,000 tonnes of crude oil. In July 1980 1,000 tonnes of crude oil spilled into Rotterdam Harbour when the 215,000 tonne supertanker Energy Concentration broke her back while unloading. Four months earlier, in March 1980, the 120,000 tonne Spanish tanker Maria Alejandra took only 40 seconds to sink after exploding off the .coast of West Africa. Most of her 42 crew went with her. In February 1980 the oil tanker Tanyo carrying 26,000 tonnes of fuel oil broke in two in heavy seas off the coast of Brittany. A few days later the Greek coast off Pillas was threatened when the tanker Irene Serenade exploded. There has been a constant pattern of these kinds of accidents around the world.
As has been indicated previously by honourable members, it is a matter of enormous concern when one recognises the sensitivity of the Australian coastline and, particularly, the Great Barrier Reef, to think of the real possibility of serious accidents or significant oil spills anywhere near the reef and the disadvantages that might occur. I mention also the environmental costs of damage to the Great Barrier Reef which' are incalculable even in terms of money costs. Very often what is lost cannot be calculated in money terms, but in money terms one is talking about rriassive costs. In 1967 the 120,000 tonne Tory Canyon ran aground off the Scilly Isles. It was the first big supertanker

Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 663

accident. The clean-up of French and English beaches cost $15m. In 1970 the spill from the stranded tanker Arrow off Nova Scotia fouled 50 miles of coastline but the main damage was on Sable Island 125 miles away. There is a reference in this legislation to excluding a release of oil 50 miles from the Great Barrier Reef. The oil slick on Sable Island killed more than 7,000 sea birds. In its 1980 report the International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation noted the risk to recreational areas, coastal industrial installations and marine flora and fauna. It said that a bad spill could wipe out a whole community's economy. In its 1978 report the British Board of Trade found:
It is not possible to define in precise terms how large an oil spill has to be in order to result in large scale coastal pollution. In general terms it would require great good fortune to avoid large scale coastal pollution following an initial spillage of 25,000 tonnes of oil, a tenth of the cargo of a supertanker and such pollution could result from very much smaller tonnages.
We are talking about a very significant problem which potentially could have a massive effect on Australia's coastline and which could result in enormous economic costs as well as the ecological disaster which would certainly occur if the Great Barrier Reef were the subject of oil spillage. We are also in an area in which there is a great lack of knowledge. I remember very well when we were carrying out our inquiry the great deal of uncertainty among scientists as to the impact ofeven a minor oil spill on the ecology of the Great Barrier Reef. We are talking about an area that is simply not known.
I make that point because very often the measure of activity is expressed in economic terms. The cost of oil spills either from shipping or from oil rigs-very often damage results from massive rig disasters such as the oil spill that affected a great area of the coast of Florida-is often measured in economic terms. Yet one simply cannot measure the ecological damage in these terms. One cannot measure easily the cost in terms of the loss of species, in terms of the loss of recreational areas and so on. 1 think to some extent the problem in this area flows from the fact that the oil industry internationally and the oil tanker industry have been dominated by firms and by economic arrangements in which the sole concern has been for short term profits rather than any real consideration of what the implications may be, for example, of the escalation of the size of tankers to present levels. Resources simply have not been put into ensuring that tankers are at a high standard when they put out to sea. The Committee received evidence that a number of tankers that visit Australian waters are not in the best of order; nor is attention given to the training of people who work on them. The net result is

that we treat disasters as if they were acts of God, as if people were not responsible; whereas we have allowed technology to develop in a certain
way, we have allowed a pattern of transport to develop in relation to the movement of oil, which very often has not paid proper regard to environmental risks and considerations.

As my time is limited, I want to make a few

point concerning the legislation. First of all I point

to the fact that whilst the legislation before us,

particularly the Protection of the Sea (Civil Liab-

ility) Bill, implements the provisions of the Inter-

national Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pol-

lution Damage 1969 it has taken a very long time

for this Convention to have been adopted by the

Australian Government. Certainly, it is three

years since this recommendation was made. The

Committee also recommended that the Govern-

ment take immediate steps to enable Australian

ratification of the International Convention on

Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for

Seafarers. I have just referred to the importance

of training people associated with ships to deal

with the problem which is the subject of this legis-

lation. That Convention obviously is quite critical

in terms of maintaining international standards

because we are talking about an international in-

dustry, not an industry which is completely within

Australia's control.

.

We are also concerned about the whole ques-
tion of the protection of the Great Barrier Reef. I
have already referred to that matter. Clause 10 of
the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from
Ships) Bill defines the outer edge of the Great Barrier Reef as land for the purposes of the Bill.
This means that ships may not dump oil within 50 miles of the outer edge of the reef. The explana-
tory memorandum says,that this clause will pro-
tect the reeffrom oil pollution damage. However, the Committee's investigation showed that there is simply not enough information available to
assume this. We do not know whatthe impact of oil on the ecology of the reef might be, nor do we know enough about the tides, the winds or the
effects of sea temperature variations to ascertain just exactly what would happen if oil were spilt even 50 miles to the east of the reef. More work
needs to be done on this question. Perhaps it is unfortunate that a greater distance was not set by the Government. The line inside which oil may
not be spilt could have been set at 100 m.iles in-
stead of 50 miles.

664 REPRESENTATIVES 11 .March 1981

Protection ofthe Sea (Civil Liability) Bill

The Committee also recommended that the Government evaluate alternative levy schemes to determine the fairest way of levying ships to finance the national plan. At present all ships carrying more than 10 tonnes of oil are levied according to the total tonnage of the ship, with no loading for the total amount of oil that they may carry. In the initial response to the Committee's report the Minister did not accept the recommendation, using the argument that tankers are no more frequently the source of marine pollution than other vessels. The potential threat to the environment of a disastrous spill at that time was not considered relevant. However, the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill introduces a minimum levy of $25 using the argument that small ships also pose a significant threat and should contribute on the polluter pays principle. I think there is some concern that the level of levies will not be sl,lfIiciently great to achieve the object of the Bill and perhaps further thought needs to be given to that question.
I conclude my remarks by congratulating the Government for at least getting around to bringing in this legislation at this time. I believe the legislation evidences the importance of work done by committees of this Parliament. I regret that the Government has not seen fit to provide this Parliament with more information on the basis on which this legislation is drafted; nor has it sought, I believe, to allow time for the Opposition to come to grips with the legislation so that if we did want to move specific amendments we would be in a proper position to draft such amendments. Nevertheless, we are pleased that this legislation is before the Parliament.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (5.49)-The Bills in the protection of the sea legislation package demonstrate clearly the Government's concern for the environment in the event of, or given the possibility of, a discharge of oil. The Commonwealth Government has constantly pursued policies aimed at protecting our coastline which, in places such as the Great Barrier Reef, is very sensitive environmentally. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.

STAGING OF B52s THROUGH AUSTRALIA FOR SEA SURVEILLANCE
IN THE INDIAN OCEAN AND FOR NAVIGATION TRAINING
Ministerial Statement
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-by leave-Honourable members will recall that negotiations on the staging of B52 aircraft through Australia were temporarily suspended to allow the new Administration of President Reagan time to examine and consider the matter. I am pleased to inform the House that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), in the course of his recent talks in Washington with the Secretary of State, Alexander Haig, took this matter further and was able to bring it to a successful conclusion. I should like to pay tribute to the Minister for his handling of this important issue. Agreement has now been reached between our two governments on the terms and conditions which will govern United States Air Force B52 staging flights through Darwin. Mr Speaker, I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the texts of the notes exchanged between the Department of Foreign Affairs and the United States of America Embassy on 11 March 1981, which constitute that agreement.
Leave granted.
The documents read asfollows~
CH099032 694/1/2
The Department of Foreign Affairs presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America and has the honour to refer to recent discussions between representatives of the two Governments concerning the proposal by the United States for the staging of United States Air Force B52 aircraft and associated KC135 tanker aircraft through Royal Australian Air Force Base Darwin, and the terms under which the proposed operations might proceed.
Subject to the terms and conditions specified below, the Governmen,t of Australia agrees to USAF use of RAAF Base Darwin for these staging operations:
(I) The B52 staging operations shaH be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes. The agreement of the Government of Australia shaH be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
(II) The operations shaH consist of periodic'deployments through Darwin of up to three B52 and six KC135 aircraft, supported by about 100 USAF personnel and associated equipment. En route to or from Darwin the B52s may conduct low-level navigation training over Australia on the basis of the arrangements announced by the Australian Minister for Defence on 3 February 1980,

Staging ofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 665

(III) Staging may include the stationing at RAAF Base Darwin of some US support personnel and equipment if requested. The support personnel would remain under US command and the RAAF would provide mutually agreed levels of logistic and administrative support.
(IV) The Status of Forces Agreement of 9 May 1963 would apply.
(V) Irrespective of financial arrangements agreed between the two Governments, RAAF Base Darwin shall remain an Australian facility under Australian control.
(VI) No circumstances arising from this Agreement shall affect the title of the Government of Australia to the relevant land, or the pre-existing authority of the Government of Australia in the use of RAAF Base Darwin.
(VII) Arrangements shall be made for consultations to ensure that the Government of Australia has full and timely information about strategic and operational developments relevant to B-52 staging operations through Australia.
(VIII) In considering whether to agree to any request for alteration of the terms of this Agreement the Government of Australia shall give weight to its international commitments and policies relating inter alia to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to Australia's commitments under the Security Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America signed at San Francisco on I September 1951, to the common objective of deterrence of Soviet military expansion and to its understanding of US strategic and operational policies and activities as derived from the consultations under subparagraph VII above.
The Department of Foreign Affairs has the honour to propose that, if these terms and conditions are acceptable to the Government of the United States of America, this Note, together with the Embassy's reply, shall constitute an agreement between the two Governments. The Department further proposes that the agreement shall enter into force on the date of the Embassy's reply and that it shall continue in force until terminated on one year's notice in writing by either Government.
The Department of Foreign Affairs takes this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its highest consideration.
Canberra, ACT II March 1981
EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
No. 38 The Embassy of the United States of America presents its
compliments to the Department of Foreign Affairs and has the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department's Note Number CH099032, dated March 11, 1981, concerning the proposal for the staging of United States Air Force B-52 aircraft and associated KC-135 tanker aircraft through Royal Australian Air Force Base Darwin and the terms under which the proposed operations might proceed.
The Government of the United States of America accepts the terms and conditions for the use of Royal Australian Air Force Base Darwin specified in the Department's Note and concurs that the Department's Note, together with the Embassy's reply, shall constitute an agreement between the two Governments effective as of the date of this Note.

The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Department of Foreign Affairs the assurances of its highest consideration.
Embassy of the United States of America Canberra, March 11, 1981
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As honourable members will note, the agreement provides that: The B52 flights shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training; the agreement of the Australian Government would need to be obtained before the facilities at RAAF Base, Darwin, could be used in support of any other category of operations; the B52 aircraft on surveillance flights will be supported by KC135 tanker aircraft for aerial refuelling and the operations shall consist of periodic deployments of up to three B52 and six KC135 aircraft; about 100 United States Air Force personnel and associated equipment will support the staging operations and some of these may be stationed at RAAF Base, Darwin; there will be no change in the status of RAAF Base, Darwin, as an Australian facility under Australian control. As the terms of the agreement make abundantly clear, nothing in the arrangements governing these flights could be regarded as in any way infringing Australian sovereignty; and the United States will provide the Australian Government with full and timely-information about strategic and operational developments relevant to the B52 staging' operations through Darwin.
The House will be aware that the United States Air Force B52 aircraft are currently conducting low-level navigation training over Australia. As the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) stated on 3 February 1980, these flights originate at Guam, the aircraft carry out navigational training over Queensland and thert they return to their base at Guam. The operations will be an extension of these current operations. After completing the low-level training exercises, the aircraft will land at Darwin and refuel. After appropriate crew rest the aircraft will undertake sea surveillance and navigation training operations over the Indian Ocean-an area of great security interest to both Australia and the United States. The flights will then return via Darwin to Guam. As is the case with the current navigational missions, the flights landing at Darwin will be unarmed and will carry no bombs.
As there has been much speculation in the media and elsewhere about this matter, I should like to emphasise that it has been agreed between the Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State that the aircraft staging through Darwin under the arrangements now agreed for surveillance

666 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ofB52s through Australia

flights and navigation training will be unarmed and will carry no bombs.
As I have also told the House, the exchange of notes provides that the Australian Government's agreement would need to be obtained before the Royal Australian Air Force facilities could be used in support of any other category of operations by the United States. In that regard, so that there can be no grounds for question or doubt, let me state the basis on which the agreement of the Australian Government would be given to such other operations: Australia would need to know, firstly, what the strategic and tactical objectives are-Australia would need to be in agreement with these-and, secondly, what weapons are being carried and in particular whether nuclear weapons are being carried. The Australian Government has a firm policy that aircraft carrying nuclear weapons will not be allowed to fly over or stage through Australia without its prior knowledge and agreement. Nothing less than this is or would be consistent with the maintenance of our national sovereignty.
I am particularly pleased that it has been possible to reach finality on this question so soon in the term of the new Administration. Australia shares the United State's determination to take all steps within its power to deter further Soviet expansionism. We stand ready to lend our ANZUS partner what assistance we can in pursuit of our common aims. The provision of staging facilities at Darwin for these United States aircraft will facilitate the surveillance and training operations they are carrying out in an area of prime security concern to Australia. it also affords a further example of the close practical co-operation which has been developed over many years between our two nations. I present the following paper:
Staging of B52s through Australia for Sea Surveillance in the Indian Ocean and for Navigation Training-Ministerial Statement, 11 March 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note ofthe paper.
Sitting suspended from 5.56 to 8 p.m.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (8.0)-The statement of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on this matter is succinct and firm. In a general way one would commend it. One has some reservations about an aspect of his statement. I stress that I am addressing myself to his statement as distinct from the exchange of letters of agreement which I will come to in a second. For instance, the Prime Minister makes it clear in his statement that in relation to navigational surveillance operations the

aircraft of the American Air Force-the B52s-

will be unarmed; they will carry no bombs. That is

fine. That is the sort of tough statement that we

want to hear. That is the sort of thing the Oppo-

sition was declaring as one of its basic require-

ments, if B52s were to operate through Australia,

when this matter was raised with various spokes-

ment of the Opposition, myself included, of

course, ment is

up to election time last fine except that there is

nyoeadre.cTlahraetisotnatein-

the agreement that the aircraft involved in sur-

veillance or navigational training in these circum-

stances will be unarmed, will carry no bombs. We

regard that as a deficiency. I will comeback to

that.

I heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) say tonight on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program PM that in fact the Americans have asked for nothing more than the opportunity to use the Darwin base in transit for .surveillance and navigational operations. Again, that is reassuring. But it seems strange to us that both the statement and the exchange of letters go on to provide certain arrangements whereby, in fact, an extension or a change of functions can be covered by the agreement. Let me pass on to comments relevant to this made by the Prime Minister in his statement. He stated:

. . . the Australian Government's agreement would need to be obtained before the RAAF facilities could be used in support of any other category of operations by the United States.

As I will point out in a few seconds, that seems clear enough except for the definition of 'category of operations'. I hate to be pin-pricking but in fact we are dealing with an international commitment, one which I presume has international obligations at law. Accordingly, the matter of definition could in certain circumstances become a matter of paramount importance. The Prime Minister said:

Australia would need to know, firstly, what the strategic

and tactical objectives are-Australia would need to be in

agreement with these-and, secondly, what weapons are

being carried and in particular whether nuclear weapons are

being carried.

.

The very next sentence reinforces that point. The Prime Minister went on:

The Australian Government has a firm policy that aircraft carrying nuclear weapons will not be allowed to fly over or stage through Australia without its prior knowledge and agreement. Nothing less than this is or would be consistent with the maintenance of our national sovereignty.

The Opposition entirely endorses that view. In fact we go further. We say that aircraft armed with a hostile capability, whether it is with conventional arms or nuclear, arms, should not in peacetime be allow to transit through Australian airspace or through Australian facilities. That is a

Staging ofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 667

fundamental and very important difference between us and the Government. They are the things, however, that the Prime Minister defines quite clearly and quite firmly in his statement.
When we go on to the letters which were exchanged, however, we find the situation somewhat different. Sub-paragraph (I) states:
The B-S2 staging operations shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes. The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
There are two matters that arise here. First, in the important document-this letter which is exchanged-whilst it is declared that the staging operations shall be for surveillance and for navigational training purposes', there is no declaration, as was firmly given by the Prime Minister, that the aircraft would be unarmed, would not be carrying bombs. It seems a simple enough thing to the Opposition to have have that included in that provision. To that extent we find the letter of agreement worryingly deficient. We are concerned, certainly after having heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs tonight on the ABC radio program PM declaring that all the Americans required this facility for was for surveillance and navigational training purposes. We are concerned to find, however, this additional proviso in subparagraph (I) which states:
The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
On the on~ hand, this may seem a pin-pricking quibble; on the other hand it is a very important consideration as to why that proviso was written in when the Americans required the facility for nothing other than surveillance and navigational training purposes. It maybe argued that this is a proviso for some time in the future but is unnecessary in that respect. That is something that could be considered by government in the future having made it clear that the facilities at this point, and until there is a change, are to be used for no other purpose. Sub-paragraph (VII) states:
Arrangements shall be made for consultations to ensure that the Government of Australia has full and timely information about strategic and operational developments relevant to B-S2 staging operations through Australia.
It is in association with that paragraph thl;lt our concern is added to. Perhaps if better arrangements were made and made much earlier for an adequate briefing by and questioning of the experts of the Department of Foreign Affairs we may have had some moderation of this conq:rn. I can assure honourable members that it would not have all been eliminated. In that respect I believe

that the Government has handled this very important proposal badly. However, it is argued by some who have looked at this agreement and who can justifiably claim to have some expertise in the field oflaw that sub-paragraph (VII) is quite separate and distinct from the second sentence of sub-paragraph (I). In that situation subparagraph (VII) seems to open up a number of rather vague.implications which, in one's comprehension of their range of possibilities, are worrying. Does it imply that, if it is in fact separate, the Americans. have only to provide full and timely information, whatever 'full and timely' might be defined as, about strategic and operation.al developments relevant to their B52 staging operations, that that is sufficient and that they can proceed with those operations? In this sense there are clear deficiencies in the proposal.
Mr White-What about if we were in trouble?
Mr HAYDEN-I think the Government is very seriously in trouble with the honourable member on the back bench. The Minister might argue that this agreement is based on the good will of the Secretary of State in the United States, Mr Haig, and himself. Fine. They are two people of good will, two people of good intent, I am certain. The fact is that they shall not endureforever, that there can be changes; there can even be misunderstandings between people as to the literal interpretations of the arrangements arrived at under the letters exchanged because they are extraordinarily vague for an international document.
In those circumstances, in an effort to tighten up these proposals, a little later the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) will be moving an amendment which in precise terms will illustrate the worry we have about the vagueness and perhaps the openness and the alternative options which are available in this letter of agreement. More importantly, it will illustrate that the letter of agreement is nowhere near as tough in its declarations of commitment as is the statement of the Prime Minister.
The other matter I want to raise is the matter of prior approval which is referred to in the letter of agreement and also in the Prime Minister's statement. I am not sure how much strength there is in the currency of prior agreement in relation to these sorts of arrangements with the United States. It saddens me to say that. I acknowledge that America is our most important ally. The Australian Labor Party recognises that and declares its commitment to it. There is a difference between a master-servant relationship and one based on equal respect. I look to the historical

668 REPRESENTATIVES 11' March 1981

Staging oJB52s through Australia

record to justify some concernabout this matter.

Honourable members will recall that at the time

of the Middle East conflict in 1973 a number of

American communications bases, including that

at North-West Cape, Australia, were placed on

red alert. We were never told about it. We could

have been drawn into that problem in various

ways, many of them quite seriously, involving

deep implications.

'

More recently, on.the occasion of the aborti~e

Iranian rescue operation of the American hos-

tages, the American Air Force used airport facili-

ties at Oman without obtaining approval and

thereby generated enormous, resentment on the

part of the Government of Oman and a great deal

of embarrassment and foreign relations difficulties

in its immediate area. Again, we have on the

record, to the eternal embarrassment of all parties

involved-I contemplate in this case a former

Australian Government of the same political ilk

as the present one-the deceit, the downright

lying, in relation to America's bombing raids on

Kampuchea. That deceit was on the part of

former President Nixon and former President of

State, Dr Kissinger.

.,

is The record not 'good. We in the Opposition

have to have tougher reassurances on these mat-

ters before we will start giving our endorsement to

these matters. We respect America. We recognise

the role she fulfils in this world. We recognise the

valuable contribution she makes to world stability

and to world peace, but we also recognise that

America, like the rest of the nations of the world, this one. included, .irr~pective .of the political

colour of the governrnent at any particular .time,

has its defects and on occasions feet of clay. We

are not prepared to be mute, uncritical endorsers

of a proposition which is as vague and as uncer-

tain as this one which has been preSente'd before

us.

In these circumstances, firstly, we regret that there was not closer consultation and, secondly, we are concerned about the deficiencies which I have outlined. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition will. be moving an .amendment which will clarify the points which give us concern. The intent will be, we hope, that the Government will take up those points in further consultations with the American authorities with a view to strengthening the agreement 'in a way which would \>e more acceptable in the Australian community.

Mr TAMBLING (Northern"Territory) (8.13}-1 am sure that iUs welcome news to the majority of the people in my electorate, the Northern Territory,- and for that matter most Australians, to learn of the announcement made

today by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Probably the only people embarrassed by the announcement today were those few members of parliament who were observing the diplomatic niceties and being entertained at the Soviet Embassy this evening. The past few months have been very noticeable as a period of 'pregnant silence' on this issue. Perhaps that was necessary to enable a sound assessment of defence planning by a new American Administration. The support of the majority of the people in the Northern Territory and of the Northern Territory Government, has been very clear for two main reasons: Firstly, the additional defence support umbrella created in northern Australia by this measure and, secondly, the indication by the Americans of the importance they place on Darwinas a strategic centre.
The Prime Minister's assurances today will allay any inherent fearsand reservations about who controls nuclear activity in Australia. As the Prime Minister stated, the B52s 'will be unarmed and will carry no bombs' and 'any aircraft carrying nuclear weapons will not be allowed to fly over or stage through Australia without the Australian Government's prior knowledge and agreement'. Nothing could be simpler than that. The agreement in' no way abrogates or abdicates our sovereignty. In fact, our hand is strengthened.
I remind the House that Australia is an incredibly resource rich country. In a number of other debates in recent days we have been looking very carefully at this matter. I would like to remind honourable members that we 'have in northern Australia about 85 per cent of Australia's iron ore reserves, 85 per cent of our uranium ore reserves, 80 per cent of our bauxite, 65 per cent of our cop- -per ore, about 60 per cent of our natural gas reserves and about 50 per cent of our silver, lead and zhic reserves. The economic potential of this part of Australia has been nowhere near fully realised. There are numerous important opportunities for economic growth and development. These are matters of national concern. I make no apology for linking them in with this issue and this discussion. We must have friends with 'big muscles'. People who wish to back away from any sort of relationship with the United States of America worry me. Unless we are prepared to assist in this sort of surveillance activity in times of peace how can we expect to look to that country for help in times of trouble?
Mr CUlmingham-How are your muscles? Mr TAMBLING-My muscles are pretty good. I hope the honourable member's have some

StagingofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 669

strength. We are discussing transit through Darwin of B52 aircraft; we are not discussing Darwin as a nuclear base.
Mr Leo McLeay-We are just a target. Mr TAMBLING-If we are a target, we are already a target. That would be a strategic decision that would be made by any aggressor at any time. During the recent Federal dection campaign the Leader of the Opposition in the Northern Territory sought to make this matter'8, very big issue. The Australian Labor Party had no credibility to back up its argument on it. More recently, I was alarmed to hear that the Leader of the Labor Opposition in the Northern Territory js seeking to introduce this topic into local government. He is attempting to manipulate the current lord mayoral elections by again introducing this matter as a scaremongering tactic. Mr Barry 'Jones~ What was your final majority? Mr TAMBLING---'---My final majority waS a lot better than that of many of the mates of the honourable member. If we were to back away from any decent consideration of this matter ,it would mean we would place ourselves in a very untenable foreign policy position. We would involve Australia in a great deal of insecurity in a time of world tension. If Australia were to say that it did not need a strong friend like the United States of America and if it were to assume that it could pursue an isolationist foreign policy, especially in the light of Soviet activity, it would be behaving like the three blind mice. Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.19)-1 support the remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). I intend to move an amendment which will indicate that
we want to h~ve it bipartisan approach to the way
in which we can achieve satisfactory arrangements with the ,united States of America. Our relationship with that nation has always been one of maturity, not one of subservience. We have been placed in a difficult position this evening. For a start, we have' been shown a complete lack of courtesy. In fairness I should say' that it was indicated to me that a statement on the matter would probably be made tomorrow. We, received notice that the statement would be presented one hour before it was made. Its presentation by.the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) was deliberately programmed for 10 minutes to six so there would be no debate on it before the news broadcast this evening. We, as a parliament, are now faced with a fait accompli. It is a most deceptive action.

If the Government wishes to talk about the

interests of Australian security why is it not able

to hold a bipartisan debate pn the merits of this

agreement? The arrangement that we are now

discussing is a treaty which is already in force. It

was put forward this afternoon 'on the,deceptive

premise th~t it had to go to the Executive Council,

and it is now a fait accompli. ~hat are_we able to

do except express our concern about what the

Prime Minister has,dorie and consider our trustee-

ship of the Australian nation? There is to be no

derogation ,of Australian sovereignty-let us

make it very <;:lear-but the Notes do not spell

that out; in fact, they jeopardise it. It is very clear

that we should protect Australian security but the

Notes do not guarantee that either. In the Prime

Minister's promise to this nation made in Darwin

during the election campaign on 19 September he

said:

.

The Australian Government would have-to be consulted if

it were proposed that aircraft carrying nuclear weapons fly

over or stage through Australia. '

'

That statement appears to be clear enough but is this spelt out in the notes? It is not. We should take a close look at the Prime Minister's statement. It refers' to flights landing at Darwin. lemphasise that. There is no question any more of flying over Darwin; the only reference is to flights landing at Darwin. The Prime Mfnistersaid that ~he aircraft will be unarmed and willcarry no bombs. That is fair enough but one would have thought that that guarantee would have been spelt out in the agreement. It is not. There is also a suggestion that the flights will be only training and surveillance missions and nothing more. Before I deal further with the notes I place on.recordthe Labor Party's policy in respect of b~ses and facilities in Australia because the Americans are always anxious to~now where we stand on this issue. The Labor Party's policy reads:

l. Ensure that the presence in Australia of foreign owned,

controlled or operated baseS and facilities d.oes not involve a

derogation from Australian sovereignty.

.

2. Not oppose the use of Australian basllS and facilitieS by

allies ill war-time,
volving a threat tQ

Aorusintrapliear,ioodrsinosfoi'nftaerransattihoenyalarteeninsivoonlviel)d-

with verification of treaties and agreements'on disarmament

and arms control, such as SALT II; provided Australian auth-

ority and sovereignty are unimpaired, and providlld t~at

Allstralia is not' involved in hostilities without Australia's

consent.

The first and fundamental' question to be asked about this agreement is whether it serves Australia and Australian security interests. I submit that it does not. We are talking about long range strategic nuClear bombers which have been specifically designed for carrying and dropping nuclear weapons and not for training flights. That

670 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ofB52s through Australia

is important when we consider the Prime Minister'sstatement to the House. As I said, he made it when we could do nothing about it. The treaty was hurried through this afternoon without the Parliament's being able to debate it. What does it really mean? Not one word in these Notes indicates that the flights will be unarmed and will carry no bombs. Sub-paragraph (I) states:
The B-52 staging operations shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes. The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
What other category of operations do the Government and the United States have in mind? Subparagraph (VII) of the notes refers to a number of other categories of operation. It states:
Arrangements shall be made for consultations to ensure that the Government of Australia has full and timely information about strategic and operational developments relevant to B52 staging operations through Australia.
The words 'strategic and operational develoments relevant to BS2s' mean that the BS2s will be carrying nuclear weapons. They do not mean training and surveillance flights. That immediately makes Australian bases legitimate targets for nuclear attack. There is no reference to flying-over facilities for bombers carrying nuclear weapons. If a bomber is flying over Darwin carrying a nuclear weapon-it can do so without having to landwhat about the safety of the people of Australia? Last year the Americans apparently indicated to this Government that they would inform it in advance whether any of its BS2s were carrying nuclear weapons. We understand that that was a mistake on their part because they are not able to give that assurance. They GO not give it to the Japanese or the West Germans so why would they put themselves in that position for the first time? Why would they jnform Australia whether their BS2s are carrying nuclear weapons? They will not do it. The Prime Minister has said that there is no need to worry too much about this issue because the flights will be only training and surveillance flights.
Again Jdraw honourable members' attention to the fact that the notes of agreement refer to operational and strategic developments. We do not have an unequivocal assurance that the United States will inform the Australian Government on all future occasions whether any of its BS2 aircraft are carrying nuclear weapons. I have already made it clear what the ~merican policy is: It is not to inform government whether its bombers are carrying nuclear weapons. That is understandable from the point of view of the Americans but from the point of view of Australian security and sovereignty it is not acceptable to the Australian

people. I make that very clear. If the bombers carry nuclear weapons tobe used against an enemy, that enemy, whoever it is, will be entitled to say that the supporting facilities in Australia are legitimate targets. This agreement is putting the Australian nation at risk and people are en~ titled to know. We would not complain had the Australian people voted for that proposition, but the Prime Minister campaigned before the election on the basis that there was no need to worry and that we would know in advance' whether bombers were carrying nuclear weapons. That is not the position now. The Prime Minister said that there is no need tei worry and that the bombers will be unarmed and will carry no nuclear weapons. If that is so there is no need for sub-paragraph (VII) of the Notes. The BS2 flights would be only training flights. We would not need to be consulted about strategic and operational developments; Sub-paragraph VIII gives away the situation further. It states:

In considering whether to agree to any request for alter, ation of the terms of this agreement the Government of Australia shall give weight to its international commitments
and policies relating inter alia to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons . . .

Of course, under the Non-Proliferation Treaty there can be no transfer of weapons to a party to the treaty such as Australia. So we have to consider whether by sub-paragraph (VII) Australia will be in breach of the treaty. It may be argued that Australia would not be in breach of the treaty if such weapons were only in transit and were not stationed in Australia. That is the reason for subparagraph (VIII). It directly relates to the ,No~ Proliferation Treaty and any possible breach of It. We have a legal obligation under the treaty. The agreement was concluded by the Cabinet. I do not know whether Government members discussed it in their party room or what input they had. The Opposition and the Australian people had no input. That is an indictment of the Government. This agreement is completely different from the statement made by the Prime Minister. I propose to move the following amendment:

That the following words be added to the motion:

"but the House is of the opinion that the Notes of Agree-

ment made between the Australian Government and the

Government of the United States of America should be varied

by omitting from the Australian Note of 11 March 1981~(l)

Clause (VII)--

.

That is the one I read out, and the amendment will in no way affect training or surveillance flights, therefore there can be no objection-

and substituting the following clause:

'(VII) It is hereby agreed tha,t all aircraft, whether staging through Australia or fiying over Australia--

Staging ofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 671

There is a distinction between 'staging through' or 'flying over'-

shall be unarmed'.

Honourable members cannot query that amend-

ment. That is the clause that the Opposition pro-

poses to substitute for sub-paragraph (VII). An

ancillary amendment to sub-paragraph (VIII),

which in no way relates to the present position,

would delete all words after the word 'expansion'.

Thus, we talk about the common objective of de-

terrence of Soviet military expansion. We stop

there, We omit these words:

.

and to its understanding of US strategic and operational policies and activities as derived from the consultations under sub-paragraph VII above.

I submit that that is a very appropriate, legitimate and honest amendment of the agreement. Firstly, it provides that there will be no objection to the training and surveillance flights. Secondly, it provides that there is no need to talk about consultation on the basis of strategic and operational developments, or the question of whether there is any conflict with the non-proliferation treaty. I submit that it is important to put into the very notes of agreement the crux of what the Prime Minister has said-that the flights will be unarmed. Why can that not be included? We will test honourable members opposite in that regard. They must surely vote for the amendment because it is in accordance with the Government's position. If they do not they will be voting for a derogation of Australian sovereignty, for not standing up for Australian interests from the point of view of whether cities are to be targets. The Government has' in no way consulted the Australian people. The Government has no mandate for this arrangement. Again I make the point that what the Government has now produced is clearly unsatisfactory. It is most important that, as a nation, we indicate that we have obligations to our own people and to this region~ We must indicate clearly to the American nation that we have a foreign policy in which our own sovereignty is important; that we are not a servile state or subservient to the foreign policy of any other country.

Many mistakes have been made. Many are in danger of being made now. One has only to look at the distinction that has been drawn as to whether American policy ought to be varied to suit Taiwan as against the Republic of China. Is there not some distinction between the view of President Reagan and those of General Haig as to which way the United States should go in this area? Are not the Chinese now very confused about the real intentions of the new United States Administration? Where does that leave the Prime

Minister, who has staked his whole political future on the basis of all the way with China now-as long as it is against the Soviet Union. Where will he stand in the next few weeks or months if the Americans decide to alter their policy towards China with a view to moving closer to Taiwan? These are the dangers of being hooked or hoodwinked by other people's views.
Discussions of this nature should, for the benefit of Australia, be conducted on a bi-partisan basis. Surely the Government should have shown enough courtesy to consult the Opposition on the matter, not face it with the fact that a treaty had already been concluded. The Government ought not to put the Opposition in the position of appearing to be anti-American; it is not. We support the guaranteeing of peace and stability of this region, but to bring down a surreptitiously made statement, a completely different agreement, is contrary to the principles of what we are about. As the time available to me has concluded, 1 formallymove:
That the following words be added to the motion:
'but the House is of the opinion that the Notes of Agreement made between the Australian Government and the Government of the United States of America should be varied by omitting from the Australian Note of 11 March 1981-(1) clause (VII) and substituting the following clause:
"(VII) It is hereby agreed that all aircraft whether staging through Australia or flying over Australia, shall be unarmed.", and
(2) all words after "expansion" in clause (VIII). '.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Scholes-1second the amendment.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (8.33)-1 am pleased to support the statement of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made earlier in the House concerning sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean and navigation training by United States B52s.
Mr Howe-Here we go again.
Mr SHIPTON-Just listen and you will learn a little. The statement of the Prime Minister must be seen in the broader context of AustraliaUnited States relations. In the past the United States has proved a strong and reliable ally. Let us not forget the battle of the Coral Sea.
Mr Scott-Don't let's forget Vietnam.
Mr SHIPTON-I hear the honourable member for Hindmarsh interjecting. He has forgotten the battle of the Coral Sea, which almost certainly saved this country from invasion. Take note of the past because history does repeat itself.
Mr Scott-Australia got dragged in.

672 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ofB52s through Australia

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Higgins will resume his seat. I remind honourable gentlemen on my left that the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition were heard in absolute silence.
Mr Barry Jones-Because they had something to say.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask honourable members, particularly the honourable member for Lalor, to remain silent so that honourable members may exercise their right to be heard in silence.
Mr Barry Jones-Tell him not to talk pitRe. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Lalor. Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I am flattered by the way in which Opposition members try to interject. Th ANZUS Treaty is the flagship of our relationship with the United States, a relationship based on mutual respect and definitely not one-sided. I believe the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), who is at present in the chamber, is to be congratulated on his successful mission to the United States. Mr Young-Why didn't he speak? Mr SHIPTON-Did not the honourable member hear the Prime Minister of the nation speak earlier tonight? I suppose he was asleep. This agreement represents, early in the life of the new United States Administration, the establishing of a sound basis of co-operation. It is one between equal partners. No question of subservience is involved. Australia's prime requirement, the maintenance of integrity and sovereignty, is in no way eroded. In fact, it is being met in every way in the agreement which has been negotiated. The United States has made a specific request, that it be permitted to stage surveillance flights over the Indian Ocean in addition to the navigational flights already occurring over Queensland. The agreement relates to surveillance in the Indian Ocean and navigational training. To hear the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) speak one would think that it represented a declaration of war. It does nothing more than talk about sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean and navigational training. It is that .and that only. The Prime Minister has stated explicitly that the flights are to be unarmed and are to carry no bombs. I repeat, they are to be unarmed and to carry no bombs. If any change to this agreement should be necessary it will become a completely different ball game. An entirely new agreement will emerge.

The carriage of bombs was not proposed or contemplated. The United States has neither made nor foreshadowed any new agreement to that effect. I believe the Opposition has been taken by surprise. It has completely underestimated the ability of the Government to bring to pass an agreement that protected the sovereignty and integrity of Australia. The Government has done that. Consequently, the Opposition has been caught flat-footed. It did not think that the Government would pull it off. We have before us a unique agreement that is a credit to the Minister and a compliment to the Government. It will protect our sovereignty and independence in a way that is probably more effective than that achieved by other countries.
We must make a clear stand on whether we believe in the Western Alliance. Are we part of it? Do we have a position? Do we know where we are going or who our friends are?
Mr N. A. Brown-Does the Labor Party know where it is going?
Mr SHIPTON-I thank the honourable member for Diamond Valley for his helpful comment. I do not believe the Opposition has a position. Honourable members opposite have not really decidedwhether they stand for the Western Alliance. The Leader of the Opposition began by talking in a low key about his reservations but, by the end of his speech, suddenly his reservations had become a substantive criticism of the agreement which he described as vague, uncertain and having deficiencies. In other words, he totally rejected it.
Dr Blewett-No.
Mr SHIPTON-He said that it was vague, uncertain and had deficiencies. In fact, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition has moved an amendment. The Opposition cannot have its cake and eat it too. Let us be clear about the agreement. I know that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is a lawyer. I do not know whether the Leader of the Opposition is also but if he is, I cannot decide whether he is worse as a lawyer than he is as Leader of the Opposition.
Dr Blewett-What has that got to do with it?
Mr SHIPTON-It has a lot to do with it because the honourable member's leader today described the agreement as vague and uncertain. He referred to sub-paragraph (VII). I wonder how many members of the Opposition have subparagraph (VII) before them. I invite them to read it. I would like to take the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition through it.

Staging oJB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 673

Mr Duffy-Read it to us. Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member will hear it. I advise him to listen. There is a great chance that he may learn something. Mr N. A. Brown-They willbe none the wiser. Mr SHIPTON-I live in hope that somehow the honourable members opposite may learn. However, I refer to the agreement and to the criticism of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition as well as that of the Leader of the Opposition. In what is called the recital to the agreement-I am sorry to have to go through this but because honourable members have heard such an inept statement from the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition tonight I have to-there is reference to the staging of United States Air Force B52 aircraft. It then refers to USAF use of Royal Australian Air Force Base, Darwin, for the staging operations. The agreement then states:
. . . staging operations shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes.
I would have thought it was pretty clear-that it is for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean and for navigation purposes. Another sentence in subparagraph in sub-paragraph (I) states:
The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
I take that to mean that a new note, will have to be agreed to by the parties if the facilities are to be used in support of any other category of operation. I take it -this applies particularly to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition-that 'other category of operations' means armed and carrying bombs.
Mr Howe-You can read, but only slightly. Mr SHIPTON-I thank the honourable member. I am sorry he is having difficulty understanding it. If either the Leader of the Opposition or the Deputy Leader of the Opposition had taken a basic course of introduction to legal methods they would be able to interpret that agreement reasonably. I have suggested, that a further agreement is needed for those bombers to be aremed and to carry bombs. Dr Blewett-That is a splendid argument for the amendment. Mr SHIPTON-Frankly, I am amazed at the honourable member's incompetence. Opposition members-Ha, hal Mr SHIPTON-I am glad Opposition members are laughing at themselves. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member for Higgins will

ignore interjections. Honourable gentlemen on my left will remain silent.
Mr SHIPTON-Another legal principle I commend to the Leader and Deputy Leader, who are the Opposition's lawyers, is that one should read an agreement as a whole. The Leader of the Opposition made an attack on sub-paragraph (VII) but he did not refer to sub-paragraph (VIII). I think the argument was probably beyond him. Sub-paragraph (VII) refers to staging operations. Sub-paragraph (I) refers to staging operations for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes. Honourable members have seen and heard the statement of the Prime Minister and they have heard the reaffirmation-referred to by the Leader of the Opposition-of the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the PM radio program tonight that these aircraft will be unarmed and will not carry bombs. I deal first with the argument of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in relation to sub-paragraph (VIII) of the agreement. He had a tenuous, extended argument that because the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was referred to, somehow that meant a transfer of technology or bombs could take place. That is a totally spurious argument. In fact, his argument destroys itself because sub-paragraph (VIII) states:
In considering whether to agree to any request for alteration of the terms of this Agreement the Government of Australia shall give weight . . .
The Deputy Leader totally destroyed every argument of his and of his Leader because he accepted the words 'alteration of the terms of this Agreement'. 'Alteration of the terms of this Agreement' means there will be a new agreement or a new note or, at the very least, a note extending or changing the terms of this agreement. In other words, it will be a totally and completely new negotiation. A new extension would have to be negotiated between the parties. I think that puts at total rest the spurious legal arguments of the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition. I believe that they are desperately casting around for reasons of criticising the Australia-United States alliance because they know they have to gain left wing support.
The Prime Minister said today that Australia shares the United States' determination to take all steps within its power to deter further Soviet expansionism. We have not heard too much about that. We did not hear tonight from the Opposition about Soviet expansionism and aggression in Afghanistan or about the Soviet-backed invasion of Kampuchea by Vietnam. We have not heard of the use by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic's

674 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ofB52s through Ausiralia

fleet of facilities in Vietnam at Cam Ranh Bay or of the use by the Soviets of surveillance facilities which give the Russian Bear bombers the capability to fly to Australia and back without landing. We have not heard of those sorts of things from the Opposition tonight. We have heardonly a technical, legal smokescreen thrown up to try to attack this very sensible agreement which respects the integrity and sovereignty of Australia. I believe the Opposition stands condemned because it needs to tell the people of Australia where it stands. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition said that the Government had no mandate, that the Opposition had been hoodwinked and that our attitude should be bipartisan. Of course it should be bipartisan because members of the Opposition should have the courage and fortitude to stand up in this place and say that they concur with the agreement. They would like to do that. I am sure that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), if he were free and able to do so, would do that.
Mr N. A. Brown-No, he is a prisoner of the Left.
Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for Diamond Valley suggests that the honourable member for Wills is a prisoner of the Left. Honourable members opposite have to say where they stand. For the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to come into this House tonight and say that the Opposition did not have time to deal with the statement is a fabrication. As I understand it, some time before 5.55 p.m. the Leader of the Opposition chose to adjourn the debate so that he could debate the matter at 8 p.m. He had the opportunity to debate the issue before 6 o'clock and so be reported on the news services. I totally reject the allegations of .the Deputy Leader about that and about the Government's actiQns. He could have been on the PM program but he did not have the guts or courage to do that. That was his option. I am terribly disappointed with the approach of the Deputy Leader to that because I have some respect for his integrity. I conclude by saying that I totally support the Government's announcement and the signing of this note and agreement. I totally reject the Opposition's stand and its amendment, and I will vote for the Government against the Opposition.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.48)-It is terribly disappointing in a matter which is of extreme importance to Australia to hear such a hollow and superficial debate put forward from the Government side. Surely the Government is at least prepared to defend the statements it has made and is especially prepared to ensure that the note of arrangements which has been agreed to, without the

prior knowledge of this Parliament or consultation with the Opposition,carries out what the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has stated that it does carry out.-The Opposition has no objection, and never has, to what the Prime Minister has stated that the agreement says. We contend that the legal jargon in the agreement does not say what the Prime Minister said it says.
Mr Sh~pton-Ijust told you what it says.
Mr SCHOLES-The honourable member would not know. Hetalks in cliches. He is back in the eighteenth century. I remind the House, including those honourable members opposite who seem to think that all they have to do is keep making assertions to discredit other people's credentials, that a statement was made on this matter by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) on 9 September 1980. I responded to that statement. The position the Opposition takes tonight is not different from that which we took on that occasion. I said:
The other matter to which I wish to refer is the question of the B52 aircraft operating from Australian airfields. My understanding is that the United-States of America is asking for overnight stopovers in transit. The Opposition has indicated that it has no objection to the use by our allies of Australian facilities.
The Leader ofthe Opposition (Mr Hayden) made the same comment tonight. On 9 September 1980 I stated further:
However, we would strongly object to the involvement of Australian territory in the storage, maintenance or servicing of nuclear weapons. We do not believe that de facto we should move into the nuclear weapons area.
I said that we believe if we are to go nuclear as a nation the decision should not be a de facto one; a positive decision should be made by this Parliament. I said that last year in this Parliament. If the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) does not know that it is because he is interested not in the subject matter which we are debating tonight but rather in political point scoring. He made reference to the fact that the Leader of the Opposition did not respond at five minutes to six tonight to the statement made by the Prime Minister. I hoped that at least Government supporters would consider this statement of sufficient importance that they would expect the Leader of the Opposition to take the necessary time not only to read it but also to seek legal opinion from experts on what the jargon means and what the terms of the notes in the signed agreement mean. The Prime Minister does not usually-he did not on this occasion-show the Opposition the courtesy which is normal in relation to such events providing the necessary documentation two hours in advance of its being presented.

Staging ofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 675

It is an important docum"ent which is entitled to be studied. The only period available to the Opposition to study this document was during the suspension of the sitting for dinner. If the Government had the courtesy to consult and to make known the proposals it intended to put forward it could have expected an immediate reply. It would be irresponsibility in the extreme for the Leader of the Opposition to stand in this Parliament and do . what the honourable member for Higgins suggests he should do, that is, to speak to an important document without prior consultation and without being able to take advice on the meaning of the document. Would the honourable member for Higgins go to' a international conference in the United States or anywhere else with the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, enter into an agreement and sign that agreement at an hour's notice without taking advice? I hope not, but that is what the honourable member for Higgins suggests the Leader of the Opposition snould have done. Let us look at this document. The Opposition's amendment will be supported by honourable members opposite if they support what the Prime Minister said to this House. That is in fact what the Opposition's amendment does. The hOQourable member for Higgins said that he is lawyer. I understand that that is true.
Mr Shipton-I made no such statement.
Mr SCHOLES-He professed a knowledge of the law and questioned the knowledge of the law of other honourable members. The honourable member for Higgins criticised the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) for proposing to remove the final words of sub-paragraph (VIII), which read:
. . . consultations under sub-paragaph (VII) above.
The Opposition's amendment also proposes the removal of sub-paragraph (VII). The amendment relates to sub-paragraph (VII). It is uot separate and it does not stand alone. If the honourable member for Higgins reads sub-paragraph (VII) he will find no reference to a bar on nuclear weapons. He will see the word 'consultations' which in other circumstances has been found to mean som~thing quite different from prior agreement. I think if the honourable member for Higgins asked Lance Barnard or Gough Whitlam about the word 'consultation' as it was used in the letters of agreement which were agreed to in 1964 relating to other bases in Australia-he coulO probably ask the former Foreign Minister also-he would find that it does not mean prior agreement or agreement in any form. It means exactly what it says-consultation. One can be talked to, and if one objects then the letters of agreement do not provide for one's objection to

have the force of law. The provision in subparagraph (VII) also states:
. . . timely information about strategic and operational developments " . .
That does not refer to training, surveillance or navigational exercises. It covers a wide range "of operations by a military force with which the Government mayor may not agree. Certainly it is not in line with what the Prime Minister has stated, nor is it in line with the earlier subparagraphs of this agreement. If that subparagraph is removed it makes the agreement what the Prime Minister said it is, except that it does not mention the ban on nuclear weapons which the Opposition would like to see included. The honourable member for Higgins went on to say that we did not talk about Soviet aggression. I find nothing in this agreement about Soviet
aggression~
This agreement deals with the sovereignty of two nations-one is Australia for which we are responsible and the other is the United States. There is a misunderstanding about the terms of our treaties with the United States. The. new honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) indicated a complete misunderstanding of the ANZUS Treaty. The ANZUS Treaty provides the United States with an obligation, subjeCt to its constitutional processes. 1 am certain that that is correct. The United States constitutional processes require that before any military action is undertaken Congress must agree to it. It is not an automatic commitment, nor can any treaty of the United States be an automatic commitment to military action in any circumstances. Congress must agree. I do not suggest any ill will or any likelihood of disagreement in thOse circumstances, but the fact is that the United States reserves for itself that right and Australia has exactly the same right. We are a sovereign nation and it is no denial of our position 'or of our support for an ally that we as a parliament and as a nation expect to be able to reserve the right to determine whether we should become involved in hostilities or war.
The honourable member for the Northern Ter~ ritory (Mr Tambling) said that the people of Darwin are not worried. I hope he is right. Nevertheless, once the Darwin. runways are altered to accommodate nuclear strike. bombers they will immediately go on the list of nuclear targets. The Russians are short of targets now. They have so many nuclear weapons they do not know where to aim them. Other factors also have to be taken into consideration. I am sure the honourable member for the Northern Territory will find out about these problems when the bombers start passing through Darwin. One problem is the location of

676 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ofB52s through Australia

the Darwin airport and the time that the operMr KATTER-I do not know whether my

ations are likely to take place. He is talking abo~t friend who just interjected has ever been to the

inflicting upon the people of his electorate the Northern Territory. I do not think that he could

most noisy aircraft in the world. In his statement find his way with a compass across Condamine

the Prime Minister stated:

Creek. Honourable members opposite have no

the agreement of the Australian Government would need to real realisation of just how vulnerable that part of be obtained before the facilities at RAAF Base, Darwin could the world is. They have said that this place was

be used in support of any other category of operations;

bombed during the war. They have said that be-

The Opposition supports that statement. The Opposition wishes that it could be certain that the

cause B52 bombers will be exercising out of Darwin the area will become a prime target.

document in fact requires that agreement. Later Let us have a look at the statement of the Prime

in his statement the Prime Minister said:

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). He says clearly

The Australian Government has a firm policy-

that the B52 flights will be for sea surveillance in

That is something new to the Opposition;. we were not aware of it-

the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training. Further on in his statement he says:

that aircraft carrying nuclear weapons will not be allowed to fiy over or stage through Australia without its prior knowledge and agreement.

The Australian Government has a firm policy that aircraft carrying nuclear weapons will not be allowed to fly over or stage through Australia without its prior knowledge and agreement.

We agree with that. We wish it was contained in the agreement but it is not. Some of the problems the Opposition has in relation to the difference between the Prime Minister's statement and the . agreement put before the House could be resolved by adopting the amendment moved by the
Deputy Leader Opposition. It would in no way detract from or remove any of the rights whJch the United States has.sought, nor would it prevent the operations. which the Prime Minister. states are the object of this agreement. The Opposi\ion asks the House to ensure that we have a bipartisan, sensible approach to this matter, one which fulfils what the Prime Minister said to this Parliament. This can be achieved by supporting the amendment.

The Opposition objects to this aspect. Itsees it as a tr~mendous threat to this country. Let us face up to the proposition. We must have a powerful ally. Many members have had an opportunity of hearing evidence, a lot informed and a lot misinformed. We have heard from armchair critics who would not know what they are talking about and from men who know what they are talking about. We have heard from people with vast experience who are dedicated to the security and the defence of this country. The views of those people were in unison. They spoke of Australia as having limited resources and finances and limitations on the calling up of manpower. We have no call up at all. The ability to expand our existing force is extremely limited. Let us not fool ourselves about

Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (8.59)-Before prothe threat to this country. I notice that no one

ceeding I would like to make one or two preliminow ever talks about five year or l7-year threats.

nary comments. The first relates to the changed With Russian submarines prowling around. the.

character of the Opposition. I do not include all Indian Ocean the threat exists at all times. But we

members of the Opposition in my comments behear no mention of this threat. What are these

cause a fine element remains among them-for insubmarines armed with? Water pistols? They

stance, the honourable members who served with would be armed to the teeth with the most savage

me on one or two committees. The performance nuclear weapons existing. Honourable members

of some Opposition members tonight, while the should not be fooled. According to honourable

honourable member for the Northern Territory members opposite the Soviet Union is absolutely

(Mr Tambling) was addressing this House with a inviolate.

good deal of feeling, reminded me of a pack of disprientated hyenas. I once said that they were sex-crazed baboons. I retract that. There is one difference between the honourable member for the Northern Territory and those who found it fitting to engage in an exercise of ridicule-the honourable member lives in the area concerned. He knows the vulnerability and the extreme disadvantages of the area.

My colleague, the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) pointed out very wisely that there is no protest whatsoever about the constant intrusion by the Vietnamese into the Indo-China peninsula. I had an interesting experience not so long ago. I met Madam Chen who was the thirteenth member of the hierarchy in Mainland China. She said in no uncertain terms: 'Do not be fooled. The Vietnamese have now moved into

Mr Young-He is not the only one who has a Kampuchea'. We were then told by a representa-

right to speak for it though.

tive of Vietnam that Vietnam did not have any

Staging ofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 677

people in Kampuchea at all. At the time Vietnam what a massive task it is to have even an elemen-

had 250,000 troops in Kampuchea. They are tary effective surveillance. Australia is doing a lot

poised on the Thai border. The Vietnamese are at the moment but it is quite beyond our present

obviously satellites of the Soviets. They have means to probe into the Indian Ocean. Maybe

massive strength behind them. They create a when' the Jindalee project is finished we will be

threat at all times. One could almost spit across able to go alittle further. A deep probing surveil-

the Indian Ocean into these vulnerable areas.

lance into the Indian Ocean will be 'provided at no

cost to this country. It is of obvious advantage. We are talking about the B52 bombers using

this country for surveillance and one or two other harmless purposes. If a survey were conducted throughout the length and breadth of this nation the people of Australia would say that, if the de-

There. has been a constant apprehension regarding the continuance of the Guam doctrine propounded by former President Nixon. I am sure that intelligent members of this House understand

fence and security of this country were at stake, we should arm these B52 bombers to the teeth. I would say the same thing. What would we do if the security of this nation were in jeopardy? Would we send our limited number of bombers and our new force of fighters? Anyone who has the most elementary knowledge of this situation would have to accept my proposition. Could we say to the nations which are likely to offer us
threats, more particularly the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Vietnam, that it would not pay them to move into a country like Australia by way of a full scale invasion, an infiltration or anything else without marking the consequences? Let us face up to the realities. Let us not bypass the possibilities in this argument. If

what would result from a continuation of that doctrine. It was merely a retreat from the Asian region. It has been very clearly indicated that that retreat has stopped. In fact, there has been a reentry into this region. Admittedly it is more or less a gesture but afew bombers will be undertaking training and surveillance work. Let us look at the matter from our own allied point of view or from the point of view of those concerned with the con-
tinuance of our philosophies. Without the ability to use Darwin as an operational base it would be virtually impossible, simply in terms of air crew fatigue, to conduct missions into the Arabian Sea area, which is further to the west, from bases in
Guam.

there were a threat we rely upon our American allies. Who else have we got? Let us. be realistic. In passing I pay great tribute to the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock). He had to mend the

A lot has been said about Diego Garcia. I have never seen it. I believe that people could run
across it in about 25 minutes fiat. It is too small and too vulnerable to attack to be suitable for the kind of role that is envisaged for Darwin. Let me

fences. He had to say to the United States: 'Look. We are not responsible for the policy that existed under the Whitlam GovernmenLto emasculate this nation'.

go back to this proposition: Are we fair dinkum about presenting some sort of effective deterrent
to any threat which may be made to this country? Darwin would be most suitable as a place for re-

Opposition members-What policy?

freshment of United States personnel stationed at bases in Asia and the Indian Ocean. Honourable

Mr KATTER-If honourable members opposite want me to enter that debate I will do so on another occasion and produce some facts. The former Minister for Foreign Affairs had to go back to the United States-as did many other Australians-and rebuild the fences. I commend the present. Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr

members will recall the crucial role played by Darwin in air operations during the Second World War. Our very limited resources were supplemented by the massive strength of the United States. The Royal Australian Air Force and the United States Air Force fought together
in a single integrated force.

Street). The people of Australia will well remember his efforts in the United States. This episode is the beginning of a real security for this country.

History has shown clearly the vital strategic im. portance of Darwin. These days perhaps we would look at not only Darwin but also Katherine

Let us look at a few other points and at some of with our greater depth of defence. The require-

the advantages of basing lJ52 bombers in this ments for aircraft maintenance, provisioning, per-

country. A very strong defence presence would be sonnel accommodation and so on ythich would be

established in the most-vulnerable part of generated by having the United States Air Force

Australia. I emphasise that point and speak with use Darwin as an operational base would have sig-

some authority. The sub-committee was able togo nificant benefit for the local economy. Basing the

into the most isolated parts of the area. We realise B52 bombers in Darwin might stimulate the

678 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging oJB:I2s through Australia

upgrading of communications. This is terribly important to us. I do not know whether it is important to other honourable members as they would not know where the north is. The upgrading of communications between Darwin and the rest of Australia is terribly important to us. The vulnerability of the current communications system could neit be demonstrated more clearly than by the effects of the cyclone which is even now threatening Darwin. The great benefits, it should be emphasised, would be the placement of an unassailable force in the very part of Australia which is presently most vulnerable and the revitalisation of our defence links with our greatest ally. I agree with my friend, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), that we should have a bipartisan approach to this matter. The very element of that approach should be the effective and realistic security of this country. Unless the Opposition radically changes its point of view in this matter, the people of Australia will be determined that the Australian Labor Partywill never be permitted to emasculate the defence of this nation.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.12)-1 want to make a few points on this agreement in support of the. amendment that has been moved by the Opposition. At the outset I state that I am glad that what we are debating tonight is the proposal moved in the motion and not the proposal suggested by the previo~s speaker, the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter). A peculiar sort of mindlessness enters this House when any debate involving the alliance with the United States of America comes up. A rapid response is given on the other side of the House and demands are'made that any particular item requested not be examined for its content or its value but must be adopted without question. It is extraordinarily difficult to have a bipartisan policy while that situation obtains. The previous speaker suggested that the B52s would cover an essential area of surveillance which is not currently covered by Australia. It is not an agreement to do that; it is an agreement, if what the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) saiq is correct, for occasional surveillance deployments. As the honourable member for Kennedy ought to know from serving on the Defence Sub-committee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, Australia performs a very valuable function through its Orion P3 aircraft patrolling most of the eastern Indian Ocean, not only for us but also for the United States. In fact Australian aircraft operate out of Diego Garcia. The honourable member also spoke of the base and said that he hoped it would be for deployment in an aggressive context, a non-surveillance context. He hoped that the

planes would be armed with nuclear weapons and that they would go on bombing missions. These sorts ofthings have been specifically repudiated in the Prime Minister's statement. Our amendment seeks to clarify the Prime Minister's position on that in the actual agreement.
We ought to put this base agreement within the context of all aspects of oUf relationship with the United States. In these debates every item is mentioned as though it were a situation created de novo. It is as though this is the first and only agreement we have with the United States and if we do not have it in whatever form it emerges in in this House without amendment United States support for Australia in all sorts of contingencies cannot be guaranteed. What a load of nonsense! We have American facilities in this country at present which perform far more significant rolessupporting the. American strategic nuclear deterrent-than this base will ever perform. If those facilities do not guarantee us American commitment in times of trouble this facility will not.
I think that honourable members opposite ought to reflect on that fact when they debate the content of the agreement, which is a perfectly legitimate thing for them to do. This agreement represents-even to those of us who are extremely enthusiastic about the Western alliancethe upper end of our relationship with the United States. If we want a strategic relationship with the United States, this is the most negotiable end of the strategic relationship. It is an end which is not essential to basic American purposes and therefore an end on which, in the process of negotiations, we will not be seriously challenged when we assert our sovereignty over any particular areas of consideration. Of course the area of consideration that our amendment suggests is that area of sovereignty which will determine that no military operations, other than those of a surveillance nature, will be conducted from Australia. I suggest that this is extremely important for us to do.
As with most debates on the American alliance, there has been a reluctance to look at the matter under consideration within the context not just of Australia's defence or ofthe immediate fac,torsinvolved in the particular facility and agreement, but within the context of our general relationship with the United States and the general relationship between the facility and the American nuclear weapons system. I want to talk about thatin the 10 minutes remaining to me because I do not think that there is a proper understanding, either in this country or in this House, of the relationship of American B52 deployments with current

Staging ofB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 679

features of American strategic nuclear deployments-particUlarly changes in American nuclear strategy. Since 1974 various responsible American officials have indicated that the United States, in the development of its nuclear force structure and targeting doctrine, intends to move away from assumptions based on mutual assured destruction to one which countenances disarming first strike capabilities, and more importantly, the possibility of limited nuclear war. Last year the then President Carter and the then Defence Secretary Brown defined circumstances in which the latter possibility-that is, a limited nuClear warmight occur. In August last year Secretary Brown told the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation nuclear planning group:
It is crucial that the Soviet leadershjp recognise that by aggression they would risk not only a general US retaliation over a full range of targets; they must also understand that if they choose some intermediate level of escalation (the) US could try more limited responses.
It is in this context that many American strategic planners are redevising the roles of various elements of the United States nuclear strike force; not the least of these changes having occurred in the Strategic Air Command. One of the reasons for the changes in the Strategic Air Command and the use of the B52 bombers is that for some years now it has sought a use for its aging bombers as developments in Soviet anti-aircraft capabilities have rendered them virtually worthless as platforms for the delivery of nuclear weapons over Soviet territory. One solution has been to place cruise missiles on the bombers, which obviates the need to approach Soviet territory any closer than 650 kilometres, and potentially at least at even greater distance. Another usage of more direct importance to Australia, and which has been made of direct importance by this agreement, has been the deployment of the planes essentially as tactical, not strategic, bombers using both conventional and nuclear weapons. Since 1974 American strategic doctrine has countenanced, as I said, the possibility of limited nuclear war with the Soviet Union, and more recently the 'possibility of the use of nuclear weapons in military situations other tha.n those directly involving the Soviet Union. The implications of this change of doctrine for the B52s was spelt out recently by General Richard Ellis of the Strategic Air Command to the Committee on Armed Services of the United States Senate. He told the Committee that because of changes in the strategic nuclear balance:
. . . deterrence can no longer be neatly divided, into subgroups, the conventional and the nuclear. It must be viewed as an inter-related, single entity.

He went on to argue that the Strategic Air Command must explore a range of what he called nonSlOP-Single Integrated Operating Plan-forces. SlOP is a blueprint for an all-out nuclear attack. He further said:
Strategic forces'are uniquely capable of supporting general 'purpose forces. The ability to execute contingency plans and procedures using SAC assets-particularly the manned bombers-markedly improves United States war fighting capability. SAC aircraft can provide rapid, long range force protection in conventional and theater nuclear areas . . .
General Ellis then specified certain contingencies. He was particularly concerned about the Middle East. This will be the final point that I will make from General Ellis's very important testimony because it affects an area of immediate importance to us; an area to which B52s stationed in Darwin would be deployed. He said:
With regard to the current world situation, combat missions could be launched from Andersen to the Middle East, if the need arises, although the distances involved are incredibly long.
Andersen is'a base in the United States. He continued:
This points to the critical and near-term need for operating bases closer to the Persian Gulf area to support both tactical and bomber forces. Standby operating bases in Northeastern Africa, Sinai, Turkey, or Saudi Arabia could be developed to accept US combat aircraft. Air operations from these bases could also support the rapid deployment ground forces program now being developed. These forward bases are essential if the United States is to effectively insert a military presence in the Middle East or Persian Gulf area.
When General Ellis gave this testimony in March last year he was not speaki,ng in the context of bases in Australia. He was, nevertheless, mentioning the importance to the United States of bringing the bases from which it deploys B52 bombers closer to the points at which it wishes to use them. One can easily slot the development that is taking place with this agreement potentially at least into that strategy unless the guarantees that the Prime Minister made in his statement-which we want to see included in all aspects of the agreementare made. It must be recognised that the United States does not simply deploy a military force to deal with threats from the Soviet Union. The United States has a wide variety of interests in which it now considers-it did not previouslythe use of its strategic forces as well as its general purpose forces; It considers them in the context of political changes in areas such as the Middle East which are of importance to us and do not necessarily involve a Soviet problem; for example, the recent hostage crisis in Iran. I would suspect that if the hostage crisis had proceeded in certain directions B52 bombers certainly would have been used, in punishment of Iran, to bomb particular air bases or military targets inside Iran. That would be a situation in which the United States

680 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ofB52s through Australia

would not have engaged in conflict with the Soviet weapons in the Middle East which did not necess-

Union but in which B52s would be used.

arily contemplate simply a context involved with

This has posed very considerable problems for Australian policy makers, problems with which members of the Government have been confronted. When the United States moves outside its relationship with the Soviet Union it moves into an area where often there are fundamental disagreements not only between members on this side of the House but also between members on the Government side of the House with regard to developments in United States foreign policy. We had the clearest examples of this in the run-up to the last election when, after a considerable amount of fanfare in which it was suggested our aircraft carrier would be deployed to help American forces in the Arabian Sea area, this deployment did not happen. From public statements it seems that the deployment was not made to the Arabian Sea area but to areas' further away, in the Indian Ocean; a very sensible decision by the Government not to become involved in that problem.

the Soviet Union. The Opposition believes its amendment, which is in line with what the Prime Minister said, will make absolutely certain that the bombers which operate from our territory cannot possibly be used in the'type of conflict which would maA:rially damage our relationships with those countries immensely important to us. They are sensible amendments; amendments not made by a party hostile to the United States alliance but by a party which intends a sensible, critical approach to that alliance and a party which hopes-from the Prime Minister's statement as opposed to the agreement-that the Prime Minister is joining it in that very sensible approach. That has not been evident from other Government speakers. It was from the Prime Minister on this occasion. The Opposition wishes to make it quite clear in the agreement that good sense will apply in all aspects of our relationship in regard to the B52 bombers. It is an important amendment to our image in areas of importance to us; it is an important amendment for our image

I believe honourable members on the Governin the Middle East. I hope Government members

ment side, particularly honourable members from will support the amendment.

the party of the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) who has just left the chamber, recognise the extremely important Australian trading interests in the Middle East area. Unless our sov-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

ereignty on matters of security related to those Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (9.27)-1 think I

countries is not clearly demonstrated these can satisfy the honourable member for Swan (Mr

trading interests will respond with economic reBeazley) and put his mind at rest over the sort of

taliation against us. That economic retaliation concern he has expressed about what could poss-

may be in the form of cutting off oil supplies ibly happen in various situations considered under

which is problematic. It certainly would be in the this 0 agreement between the Australian and

form of cutting off features of trading links which United States governments. I could demonstrate

are extremely important economically to this quite clearly to the House that the concerns he

country. In those circumstances an area of fundahas expressed are well covered by the agreement

mental disagreement with the United States is and that the Australian people, through its

bound to arise.

Government and this Agreement, will be fully

The flights from Darwin may not be purely surveillance flights but flights for other purposes. The other purposes are at least contemplated in this Agreement. The latter part of sub-paragraph (I) has this to say:

protected from those concerns. I would like to reo mind the House that we are talking about a statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) -which clearly is a disappointment to the Opposition-that the agreement for the staging of B52 bombers through Darwin is purely for sur-

The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.

veillance and navigational training purposes and that absolutely no weapons, certainly no nuclear weapons, are involved in this whole agreement.

If the facilities are used in a context other than This was of such concern to the Opposition-

that of surveillance we will find ourselves inthere is no particular fuss that it can raise on the

volved in political situations in which we certainly subject of nuclear weapons-that for some extra-

do not want to be involved. I mentioned earlier ordinary reason, it has hidden the essentially bi-

that these political situations were directly conpartisan approach to what has happened by two

templated by a responsible official of the United absolutely insulting amendments. It is those

States Strategic Air Command; that is, the use of amendments to which I wish to address myself

bombers with conventional bombs or nuclear this evening.

Staging oJB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 681

This agreement, in support of the Prime Minister's contention, quite clearly states:
The Australian Government has a firm policy that aircraft carrying nuclear weapons wi! not be allowed to fly over or stage through Australia without its prior knowledge and agreement. Nothing less than this is consistent with the maintenance of our national sovereignty.
That was what the Prime Minister said this evening in introducing this agreement to the House. Clearly it is understood by the Government of the United States of America, by this Government and by everybody who heard what the Prime Minister said, that that is the Government's firm policy. In the agreement that has been signed between the two governments we have this sub-paragraph:
(I) The B52 staging operations shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes.
That is what they are for and it is quite clear that they will have nothing to do with offensive operations of any kind and do not involve the carryng of arms of any kind. The agreement looks forward to the possibility that there may be some future request to do something different. That is only reasonable. The sub-paragraph continues:
The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations.
In other words, if there is any suggestion that these planes are not used for sea surveillance or for navigational training purposes only then the agreement of the Australian Government will be required. Sub-paragraph (VII) of the agreement-a very important part of it-states:
Arrangements shall be made for consultations to ensure that the Government of Australia has full and timely information about strategic and operational developments relevant to B52 staging operations through Australia.
This would mean that if there were any extension of the specific request that the United States of America made to Australia to extend the use of these aircraft in any particular way, that would follow consultation of the kind suggested in subparagraph (VII).
The concerns addressed to the House by the honourable member for Swan looked to the possibility that there might be a request by the United States to extend the use of these aircraft. He put forward the testimony of General Ellis, who talked about the possibility of using B52 bombers for various offensive purposes under certain conditions in other parts of the world. He extended this argument to the possibility that there may in some future situation be a possibility that in Australia there would be some need to have a staging of bombers with a nuclear capacity. That is, as I understand it, the concern expressed by the honourable member for Swan. It is quite clear

from the agreement and it is quite clear from the statement of policy that has been given by the Prime Minister tonight that were such a request to emerge it would be known in advance under the consultation arrangements. There would indeed be consultations in any case in accordance with the stl;ltement made by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) in February 1980 and under various arrangements for consultation which go well beyond this specific agreement. .
The Opposition requires us to substitute a new sub-paragraph (VII) which states:
It is hereby agreed that all aircraft, whether staging through Australia or flying over Australia, shall be unarmed.
I would suggest that that amendment is not only unnecessary but also somewhat inSUlting to the intelligence of those who negotiated the agreement both for the United States and for Australia and to any sensible observer of what is going on here tonight. I regard the first part of the amendment as being both unnecessary and quite insulting.
Let me move on to the second part of the amendment. It relates to sub-paragraph (VIII) of the agreement. Sub-paragraph (VIII) talks about the kind of considerations that might be looked at if there were any suggestion from the United States that there had to be an extension of the use of the B52s. So obviously all the kinds of concerns that have been raised by the honourable member for Swan were considered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and by the Government when they were negotiating this agreement. I believe they have all been considered quite sensibly and that they all have been dealt with, because sub-paragraph (VIII) states:
In considering whether to agree to any request for alteration of the terms of this Agreement the Government of Australia shall give weight to its international commitments and policies relating inter alia to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons-
That is quite important-
to Australia's commitments under the Security Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America signed at San Francisco on 1September 1951-
Which, of course is the ANZUS agreement-
to the common objective of deterrence of Soviet military expansion and-
This is the bit that the Opposition wants to knock out under the second part of its amendment-
to its understanding-
That is, Australia's understanding-
of US strategic and operational policies and activities as derived from the consultations under sub-paragraph VII above.
The House will recall that I said that under subparagraph (VII) we had arrangements for continuing consultation on what the United States

682 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging ojB52s through Aus,tralia

was doing around the world, what its strategic concerns were and what its operational developments were. That is what sub-paragraph (VII) provides for. All sub-paragraph (VIII) does, apart from asking the Australian Government in looking at requests for further uses of B52 aircraft, is to look at the obligations of treaties we have. It also asks the Australian Government to look to its understanding of United States strategic and operational policies whjch it has gained from consultation. Would it not be sensible for the Australian Government in considering a request for extension of the use of facilities to consider what it had got .from consultations under sub-paragraph (VII)? The Opposition is suggesting we knock that out. I cannot for the life of me understand why it would want to knock out of these considerations information gathered in the course of consultations which are required under the agreement. If it has any argument for doing this other than to demonstrate an innate suspicion of our principal ally I would like to know what this reason is.
We have before the House what I thoVght was an absolutely clear-cut statement of the Australian Government's policy, a statement of an agreement negotiated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs with General Haig in Washington only during this last week, and to my mind a most favourable and useful agreement under which the United States of America is able to conduct the most innocuous exercises using Darwin as a staging base to carry out no more than surveillance and navigational training operations. There are full safeguards under that agreement. Should the United States wish to extend its use of those aircraft for any other purpose two considerations will apply. First of all, there is the right to place an absolute veto on any such extension. Secondly, there is a declared statement of policy by the Government given by the Prime Minister that we will not under any circumstances agree to the carriage of nuclear weapons by these aircraft without our prior agreement. But on top of that there is an agreement to consultation on the use of these bases, consultation about the strategic and operational developments relevant to these operations that might be considered at any stage by the United States. But the Opposition suggests that we shquld eliminate from the terms of the agreement the very information that we would need to make a sensible determination as to whether we were going to agree to any extension of those facilities or uses. That is ,quite beyond my understanding.
I would suggest to the House that we reject both parts of the amendment. We should reject

the first on the grounds that it is totally unnecessary and also I believe an insult to our allies and our own government, who negotiated a very sensible and reasonable agreement. We should knock out the second part of the amendment on the grounds that it is positively damaging to the interests of this country in that it removes from the agreement one of the essential mechanisms by which we could judge any further request for the extension of the use of those facilities.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (9.38)-1 think we should look at this question in another context-the very serious context of the big power rivalries, the big power conflict which regrettably exists in the world today. An old Korean proverb says: 'When the whales fight the shrimp get crushed'. Most of the countries of this world are in fact shrimp. Those countries are seeking a state of peace. They are seeking to reduce the big power rivalries. We should think very carefully before we as one of the smaller countries, as one of the prawns as somebody on the other side of the House suggested, but certainly as one of the small fish, make any decision that can be seen and co~ld in fact be interpreted as an escalation of big power rivalry.
The Government has followed a curiously inconsistent course. I think I can quite rightly and readily use the word 'hypocrisy' because 'hypocrisy' means saying one thing and doing another. The recent meeting of the Common~ealth Heads of, Government in New Delhi in September 1980 which dealt with the Indian Ocean area had something, to say about the .Indian Ocean and the dangers that arise from big power rivalry. A communique signed by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated:
Heads of government noted with concern that despite the expressed wishes of the littoral and hinterland States, great power military presence in the indian Ocean has increased and that there has been a deterioration of peace and security in the Indian Ocean ar-. They further noted with regret that recent events in the regIOn, together with the worsening international situation, have caused a further build-up of great power military presence. While regretting the susp"ension of the bilateral talks on arms limitation in the Indian Ocean between the Sovij:t Union and United States and reaffirming their commitment to the ultimate establishment of a zone of peace iii the Indian Ocean in accordance with the 1971 UN declaration, they called upon the great powers to take active and effective steps to remove existing sources of tension in the area.
That statement regretting the arms build-up of the great powers in the Indian Ocean was signed by the Pri~e Minister of Australia. It refers to a 1971 Un,ited Nations declaration,a declaration that wasalso signed by the Australian Government of the day. In each year at each of the United Nation's meetings going right through to

Staging ojB52s through Australia

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 683

the last UN meeting this resolution has been put where that is possible. The United Nations be-

forward and voted on. Let me recall what that lieves it is possible but the United Nations is just

declaration stated, a declaration that I reiterate the body which signed that declaration. Tbe Aus-

was signed by the Australian delegation. The dectralian Government also signed that declaration.

laration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace From 1970 on Australian governments of both

stated that the General Assembly:

political parties have believed that there is a possi-

Calls upon the great powers, in conformity with this Decbility of having a free zone in the Indian Ocean. If

laration, to enter into immediate consultations with the litthey did not hold that belief the declaration

toral States of the Indian Ocean with a view to:

should not have been signed. But it has been

(Ii) . Halting the further escalation and expansion of their signed.
military presence in the Indian Ocean;

(b) Eliminating from the Indian Ocean all bases, military

Mr Birney-And the Russians.

installations and logistical supply facilities, the disposition of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass de-

Mr MORRISON-I agree, the Russians too.

struction and any manifestation of great Power miliWe took our petitions to the Russians. The Rus-

tary presence'in the Indian Ocean conceived in the context of great Power rivalry:

sians are being called upon as one of the two great powers. Regrettably, the influerce of small

Today woe are faced with an escalation of that presence in the Indian Ocean. We have all learned

powers must be used together to create influence on the two great powers. That is what we should

what that term means because it was one that bebe seeking to do. I think it is a cause of some con-

came current in the Vietnam war. It means one cern that we go ahead willy-nilly with proposals

starts off on the bottom rung of the ladder and the that must be measured in terms of escalation and

impetus takes one on and up without imy overt also in terms of a Russian response. Each action of

control. It seems to me that this Government has the Russians will be met by the Americans and

been following a Jarius-like policy. It has been each action of the Americans will be met by the

voting in the United Nations. It has'been voting at Russians. Both sides will be the losers. The great-

the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetest losers of all will be those who live in the littoral

ings and no doubt it will be doing the same thing and hinterland states of the Indian Ocean.

again at the Commonwealth Heads of Govern-

ment Meeting to be held in Melbourne. It has I make a plea to the Government to consider

been saying that we seek demilitarisation of the very carefully any steps that are likely to increase

Indian Ocean, yet it has been encouraging in a sort in the Indian Ocean a military presence which di-

of gungho jingoism our ally, the United States, to rectly goes against both CHOGM-the Common-

effect a further buildup in the Indian Ocean. The wealth Heads of Government Meeting-and the

honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) United Nations declaration. I believe the Govern-

who is chairman of a sub-committee of the Joint ment should be honest: It should say either that it

Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence does not believe in the United Nations declar-

pointed out that there were some fences to be ations or that it does not believe in what the Prime

mended when this Government came into power Minister signed less than a year ago in New Delhi

after 1975. There were not, The Labor Governand that the area is headed for confrontation. I

ment took Australia's role as an ally very believe there is a possibility of peace but that

seriously. It was not a role in which we said: 'We peace will not be brought about by continuing

agree, U:nited States sir, with everything you say escalation. I fear that the proposition tonight

and do'.

comes into that category. I think we should look

I had the pleasure, as Minister for Defence, of visiting Washington and talking with my opposite number, Dr Schlesinger, on the question of the Indian Ocean. Our message was very simple and very straightforward. It was that we believed, as an ally of the United States, that there should be a rundown in the United States presence in the
Indian Ocean. We have said exactly the same

'

at it in that context. What will the Russians do in response to this? What will the Americans do then in response to the Russian response? We can see where it all could lead. It is not a matter of gungho jingoism; it is a cause of very great con-
cern. I only hope that the Australian Government and the Australian people will see it in that context.

thing to the Soviet Union. We wanted both sides Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield) (9.48)-1 find it

to cool it. This area has a capacity to be 'a free a matter of some concern that members of the

zone. One might say this is all poppycock, that Opposition, no doubt believing as they do in the

one cannot have such things as free zones. But I right of all men--

think it is very important for any government to try to influence its major partner to utilise some

Mr Scholes-You are breaking the agreement.

discretion and to try to de-escalate in an area Mr CONNOLLY-I am sorry.

684 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Staging oJB52s through Australia

Question put:

That the words proposed to be added (Mr Lionel Bowen's amendment) be added.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Dr H.A. Jenkins)

Ayes

45

Noes

61

JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-Mr Speaker has received the following message from . the Senate:
Mr Speaker, the Senate transmits to the House of Representatives the following resolution which was agreed to by the Senate this day-

Majority
AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown,Joh~
Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi,R. Johnson, Les (Teller)

16
Jones. Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford,J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond,P.H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom, R. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, I. W.

Hyde,J.M. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeighD. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Viner,R.I. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

That, for the remainder of the present period of sittings, the Joint Committee on the New Parliament House and its Subcommittee be granted leave to meet during sittings of either House of the Parliament. The Senate requests the concurrence of the House of Representatives in this resolution.
Motion (by Mr McVeigh) agreed to:
That consideration of the message be made an order of the day for the next day of sitting.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (CIVIL LIABILITY) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (9.59)-As I was saying before the debate onthese Bills was suspended, the issue relates primarily to sensitive environmental legislation which the Government has introduced. This package upgrades the existing legislation and gives the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) wider powers in the likelihood of our coastline being exposed to pollution. As such, it is an advance in marine pollution prevention. Environmental legislation is not a new initiative of this Government. These Bills relate to the protection of Australia's coastline. I am sure I do not have to remind honourable members of this House of the tremendous asset that we enjoy in that regard in Australia. To seek to broaden our control and influence over the prevention of marine pollution is logical and necessary. Large areas of our coastline are susceptible to considerable damage and it is necessary, through the provisions of this legislation, to recognise the degree of civil liability and compensation that must be accommodated. Several years ago, as other speakers in this debate have already mentioned, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation submitted a report which outlined many findings and a number of recommendations relating to the prevention and control of oil pollution in the marine environment. This legislation, of course, picks up many of those recommendations. It is obvious that a number of the others are already being operated on and implemented by the Minister in this place and the various State Ministers with due responsibility.

Protection ofthe Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981 11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 685

It is important to recognise that this legislation picks up our obligations under international conventions. Therefore, we are accommodating oil pollution measures, insurance requirements and an indication of the Government's support for the broader protection of our international objectives. The legislation before the House highlights a number of issues of particular importance. These relate to the Great Barrier Reef. Special provisions have been taken up in the legislation through the redefinition of what is titled 'nearest land'. Technical standards to protect the environment are also brought into the ambit of this legislation through the size and location of cargo tanks, survey and construction requirements and in various measures in the Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill to broaden the definition relating to oil.
The honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) commented on the process by which international conventions are taking place. I gained the impression that he implied criticism of the Minister with regard to timing in that regard. I think it is important to recognise that the process of improvements in legislation arising from international conventions is a steady one. These improvements cannot be achieved quickly and overnight. Our progress depends on developing technical control equipments and achieving international consensus. This takes time. I accept that this legislation is a great move in that direction. Similarly, the national plan that has been referred to is a joint operation between the Commonwealth and the States. It involves necessary consultation with industry in this regard. It has been developed through a close working relationship between the Commonwealth, the States and industry. I am pleased to support the legislation.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (l0.4)~The legislation before the House deals with pollution of our harbours, sea and coastline resulting from spills of oil and other hazardous substances from shipping. Individual Bills will force compulsory insurance of ships and tankers over 2,000 tonnes, enable the collection of damages due to shipcaused pollution and provide fines for illegal dumping of oil in the ocean and harbours. It provides powers of intervention to control pollution at its source, that is the ship, and the means of collection of a levy to help pay for the clean-up of pollution caused by unidentified shipping.
As with many other Bills putting international agreements into force in Australia, the LiberalNational Country Party Government has been extremely slow in ratifying the first two conventions contained in this legislative package. In 1978

the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation tabled a report on the prevention and control of oil pollution in the marine environment. It recommended that the Commonwealth ratify the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage of 1969. The first Bill in this package will enable the Commonwealth to implement that Convention. The Committee made a total of 25 recommendations to the Government and reported 14 findings. The inquiry was the first independent look at Australia's capability to deal with oil pollution. The Committee found that:
With increasing importation of oil and refined products to Australia there is a serious threat of larger and more frequent oil spills . . . Oil spills can cause substantial environmental and economic damage.
Of that there is no doubt. While Australia's coastline is so large and the major role played by the States makes the centralised control of oil pollution impractical the Committee was concerned that the division of responsibility between the Commonwealth, State and local authorities may have led to unco-ordinated approaches. How often have we heard similar criticism of the present Government, that it rarely acts in a coordinating role in spite of its avoidance of other responsibilities? Fraser federalism, or new feudalism, as trumpeted by the present Government, is aimed at the establishment of an Australian common market rather than the creation of a uniform nation with uniform laws. The Government's 1979 response to the Committee's report claimed that the majority of the recommendations had been or were being implemented. It rejected only one recommendation outright. With such a response one would have expected that everything would be all right, but such was not the case. The Opposition spokesman for transport, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris), was critical of the Government's response as far back as 1979. At that time we said that a lack of qualified crew on flag of convenience tankers navigating the difficult waters of the Torres Strait and the Great Barrier Reef, coupled with faulty navigation charts, posed a serious hazard. Captain Sanderson, a Sydney marine consultant, stated early this year:
Considering that the Barrier Reef is not only a favourite of conservationist lobbies, but also a major shipping lane, the chances are high that a casualty could occur in this sensitive area.
There is also the serious problem of identification of individual oil cargoes to trace particular vessels. In 1978 oil from a spillage washed up along a 320-kilometre stretch of Queensland and New South Wales coastline. The slick was weeks old when it reached the shore and the culprit still has

686 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981 Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981

not been identified. The second reading speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) outlined the purpose of the legislation package. He stated:

The package represents a major advance in marine pollution prevention and combat in Australia . . . Australia as an island continent has a long coastline that, in places, is environmentally extremely sensitive and I believe it is now opportune to introduce legislation to augment the existing law.

Unfortunately, the speech was extremely short. It

gave us no idea how this legislation fits into the

overall oil pollution protection activities of the

State and Commonwealth governments, except

for a reference to the need for Commonwealth

legislation. As a result of the understandings on

off-shore matters reached at the 1979 Premiers

Conference, the Minister limited himself to a brief

description of the purposes of each Bill. He did

not mention the role of the States in oil pollution

prevention, the need for consistent legislation

amongst the States, the national plan to combat

oil 'spills or anything else relevant to the actwli

physical control of oil pollution of the sea. Was

the Minister too shell-shocked from the flak aris-

ing from the Holcroft inquiry to speak out prop-

erly on this legislation? If so, I am sure that the

House would like to hear a full new second read-

ing speech, not simply a precis which provides as

little information as possible.

.'

I draw the attention of the House to the holes in the legislation arising from the coalition Government's disgusting collapse to the wishes of the States in giving away the Commonwealth's rightful control of the territorial seas and seabeds last year. Clause 9, of the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill states that the Bill will not apply to the territorial sea, that is, out to the three-mile limit. The Federal Government leaves control of dumping of oil in the territorial sea to the States. At the moment, legislation governing oil pollution in navigable water varies between the States. The Commonwealth was criticised in the House of Representatives Committee report for lack of co-ordination. We have here a prime example. If the Commonwealth is to playa co-ordinating role it must act responsively and not leave a legislative vacuum. Present State legislation does not mirror the Federal legislation since fines in Federal legislation are greater than those of the States. Although States such as New South Wales have adequate legislation to cover pollution in their water the Commonwealth must not abandon the field until all States reach the desired level.

Oil spills cause huge pollution problems. The names Torrey Canyon, Oceanic Grandeur and Amoco Cadiz evoke visions of foundering tankers in the midst of huge spreading oil slicks. Oil well

blowouts at Santa Barbara, Ekofisk in the North Sea, and Ixtoc 1 show that tankers are not the only danger to marine life. The effect of such oil spills can be the death of thousands of birds, fish and marine life as well as the fouling of beaches and rocky shores, and the smothering of mangrove swamps. The House of Representatives Committee identified five ways in which oil can damage a marine ecosystem. They were by direct coating leading to suffocation; by lethal toxicity of component; by altering the habitat of wildlife; by accumulation of hydrocarbons over a period; and by alteration of behavioural response. The oil coating of birds and surface feeding fish is th!,: most obvious effect of oil pollution. How many time have we seen reports and pictures .of oilcovered birds struggling and dying on oil-fo).lled beaches. Unnoticed to most people is the destructi,on of bottom and shore-line dwelling organisms caused by direct smothering from oil settling on beaches or the bottom of the sea, and. by the toxic effects of oil itself.
The Committee reported that environmental damage caused by frequent small oil spills is often as great as, if not greater than, larger once-only spills. When we have chronic oil pollution we have two problems. Firstly, marine ecosystems are put, continually, under stress by these conditions and a number of species die out, upsetting the balance of the whole ecosystem. Secondly, repeated spills ,cause an accumulation, of hydrocarbons which can taint fish and sea pool and may reach the stage where there could be a risk of malignant tumors occurring in both fish and even man. Besides damage to the marine ecosystem and commercial fisheries, there is the visual poilution of fouled beaches, rocky foreshores and so on which result in the temporary loss of recreational resources. In holiday areas this can cause a severe financial loss. The slick from the Ixtoc 1 oil well blowout in the Gulf of Mexico caused a 60 per cent drop in tourism when it washed up on the South Texas coastline. The recent 20-tonne oil spill from the World Encouragement in Botany Bay, of September 1979, in which the slick flowed in mangrove swamps and oyster leases, caused more than $.1m worth of damage to the oyster industry and cost $210,000 to clean up. In January 1980, a blowout at an off-shore oil field in Nigeria sent 30,000 tonnes of crude oil snaking through islands and river channels of the N,iger Delta, ruining drinking water and the food supplies of thousands of river people.
Large oil spills, whether from tanker disasters or oil well blowouts, can certainly affect a huge area of coastline. The Oceanic Grandeur ran aground in the Torres Strait spilling 2,400 tonnes

Protection o/the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981 11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 687

of oil. It was stated at the time that, but for clement weather and skilful ship handling, this could easily have been a major oil spill disaster comparable to that from the Torrey Canyon. When the well at Ixtoc 1 in the Bay of Campeche in the Gulf of Mexico blew out in June 1979 it resulted in the largest oil spill in history. Some 3 million tonnes of light crude poured out till March 1980, when the well was finally capped. The slick travelled more than 950 kilometres north to foul a 240 kilometre stretch of Texas beach and coast, causing severe damage to the tourist and fishing industries. Pri-
vate groups in Texas filed law suits in the United
States for $377m in damages against the Pemex oil company and the Sedco drilling firm. That blowout showed that oil well blowouts were a great danger to the environment. It gave the'lie to the oil companies' claim that they had the technology to stop oil pollution. It proved that there can never be any oil drilling in the Great Barrier Reef region if the safety of the reef is to be guaranteed.
In. 1969 the Department of Transport held preliminary consultations with other Commonwealth departments and representatives of State governments and the oil industry to consider the establishment of a contingency plan. The National Plan to Combat Pollution ofthe.Sea by Oil was developed primarily to cope with oil pollution from shipping. The attempts to formulate a national plan received added impetus from the grounding of the tanker Oceanic. Grandeur in Torres Strait. This highlighted Australia's inability to deal with such problems. An advisory committee on marine oil pollution was established with the task of advising on the best methods of combating oil pollution, and the selection of equipment and material. A loan of $lm was obtained from the Commonwealth Government and invested in recommended equipment. The national plan became operational on 1 October
197~.
The three areas of jurisdiction are the open sea beyond te~ritorial waters, near-shore and territorial waters, and ports and harbours. In regard to the near-shore and territorial seas there are varying degrees of agreement between individual States and the Commonwealth as to where responsibility for the control of oil spills begins and ends. Port and harbour authorities exercise a considerable degree of autonomy, with only limited Commonwealth or State authority governing local decisions. The use of chemical dispersants was initially selected as the mainstay of the national plan as recovery devices effective in open waters and capable of being rapidly transported to potential incident sites around Australia were not available.

The House of Representatives Committee report on oil spills made the following comment regarding the National Plan:
Australian resources are adequate to deal with day to day problems. However, the national plan and its resources may be ineffective in dealing with a moderately large spill, through lack of equipment or delays in transporting it to the spill site.
The National Plan deals with the clean-up after the event but how does it prevent oil from reaching environmentally sensitive areas? lunderstand that booms to contain oil slicks in harbours are not supplied under the National Plan. If this is the case it severely reduces the effectiveness of the National Plan to reduce environmental damage caused by oil spills.
I turn now to the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill, clause 10 of which gives effect to the 1971 amendment of the International Convention for the Prevention. of Pollution of the Sea by Oil of 1954, concerning the protection of the Great Barrier Reef. The clause prohibits the dumping of oil within 50 nautical miles of a line drawn outside the reef. It is essential to bar any dumping of oil near the reef. Is 50 miles a reasonable distance to ensure its protection? At the appropriate stage I propose to move an amendment in the following terms:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'while not denying the Bill a second reading the House urges the Minister and the Government, at the earlieSt opportune time, to extend the distance within which oil may not be discharged to 200 nautical miles east of the line drawn under Article 1 of Schedule 4 of the Bill.,,'
My reason is that under clauses 9 and 10 of the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill a discharge rate of some 60 litres per mile is permitted outside a distance of 50 miles from the nearest point ofland. In order to protect the Great Barrier Reef, the Bill designates that the nearest land for the purposes of clause 9 is to be the outermost portion of the Barrier. Reef. It draws a line, purportedly 50 miles out from the Barrier Reef, inside which oil should not be discharged.
The point is that the Barrier Reef has one of the most fragile ecosystems in the world. This Bill would not treat it any differently from the way it is being treated now, despite the fact that the line to be drawn under this Bill would be 50 miles out to sea from the Barrier Reef. Despite agreements which have been made already at international conferences, we think it is reasonable for us towork towards achieving a situation in which no oil whatsoever is discharged into the sea within 200 miles of the reef; that is to say within the Australian zone agreed to at international conferences. There does not seem to be any reason for

688 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Adjournment

our not working towards that end. The fact remains that many tankers travel in waters inside most of the reef down the Queensland coast. But it would not be necessary for them to deviate from that route unless they wished to discharge oil. They would be affected only in those circumstances.
The point I make is that the legislation allows 60 litres of oil a mile to be discharged. That does not seem very much, but the distance over which such oil can be discharged is not restricted under this legislation, nor is the number of ships that can discharge oil. So we could have a situation. in which, over a short period, a number of ships were discharging oil at the rate of 60 litres a mile for 1,000 or 1,500 nautical miles up the Queensland coast within 50 miles of the Barrier Reef as designated in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act. We think that it far too close to the Barrier Reef. Whilst it might be difficult to change the situation in the short term, we hope that the Government will accept the amendment I propose to move, which requests the Government, at the earliest opportune time, to extend to 200 nautical miles east of the line drawn under Article I, Schedule 4 of the Bill the distance from the reef within which oil may not be discharged. I conclude by saying that there are basically-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Les Johnson) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT Care of the Aged-'-Coal Industry-Nuclear Power Stations in Victoria-Australian Touring Cricket Team-8outh Australian Taxation Department-Community Youth Support
Scheme-Criticism ofMember Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (10.25)-Just as for five years this Government has lived by fantasies to cover the facts of a stagnant economic system, it has a tendency to make up fairy tales to put a gloss on its rather uninspiring record in social welfare. One example of those fairy tales is the claim that it is responsible for the twice-yearly indexation of pensions. Legally, formally, that is true, but it is factually a pretty misleading statement because it was the Whltlam Government which introduced the practice of twice-yearly adjustment of pensions. It was under the Whitlam Government that in three years pensions jumped from 19.3 per cent of average weekly earnings to

23.4 per cent of average weekly earnings. That was the real leap forward. Pensions have remained at about that figure ever since and the slight marginal advance that has been made in the past five years is the result solely of the retardation of real wages. That is about the best that can be said for the Fraser Government in the field of social welfare: No innovation, no imagination, no advance; simply, at best, the maintenance of the achievement of the Whitlam Government.

It is therefore rather surprising to encounter the latest fairy tale that the Fraser Government somehow has made a particular and c1istinctive contribution towards the aged. The best the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) can tell us about that distinctive policy is:

The Government has a clear-cut policy towards the aged,

which is aimed at assisting them.

.

The Minister went on to list forms of assistance, none of which was initiated by the Fraser Government. But the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), a rather shonky manipulator of figures, has endeavoured to give some statistical precision to that fairy tale. On 27 November 1980 he asserted, as evidence of the Government's record on the aged:

Australia has the highest level of nursing home beds per 1,000 head of population in the world.

I do not know whether that comparative statistic is true and I can find no comparative supporting evidence one way or the other. But I do know that the honourable member for Macarthur, in his vendetta with the New South Wales Government, does not seem so keen to .recognise the fact that New South Wales has the second highest ratio of nursing home beds to population in the country. He does not seem to be prepared to accept that the situation in New South Wales is an indicator of the Government's concern for the aged.

Let me note also that, although the number of nursing home beds has increased under the Fraser Government, the number has not kept pace with the increase in the PoP! dation of the aged, so that the number of beds pel' thousand people over 65 years of age has fallen marginally under the Fraser Government. The fall has been only marginal, but I do not want to make much of that point because I do not regard the number of nursing home beds as the key index of the Government's concern for the aged. It is true that some have their Jekyll moments; I think that is true also of the honourable member for Macarthur because he has a double-edged view on that point. On 26 February 1981 the honourable member for Macarthur claimed:

Adjournment

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 689

. . . Fraser Government has increased the proportion of the gross domestic product spent on the aged very significantly.
He underlined that point and said that it was a 'very nice increase in Commonwealth expenditure'. He made that extraordinary claim on the basis of a table, contained in the AuditorGeneral's report, on an efficiency audit which compared 1973-74 figures with 1978-79 figures. Anyone, even one as shonky with figure manipulation as the honourable member for Macarthur,

must have recognised that it was unwise to ignore the last two Labor Budgets-that is, the Budgets for 1974 and 1975-in making that comparison. Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a table which includes figures for the years missing from the Auditor-General's report; that is, figures for 1974-75 and 1975-76.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

COMMONWEALTH EXPENDITURE ON THE AGED IN RELATION TO THE COMMONWEALTH BUDGET AND GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT

Category

1965-66 (I) (2)

1969-70 (I) (2)

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

(I) (2) (I) (2) (I) (2) (I) (2) (I) (2)

1978-79 (I) (2)

Commonwealth expenditure on

aged by specified departments

(Sm) . . . . . . . . . 561.6 467.0 835.2 693.0 1,694.0 1,491.2 2,390 1,920 3,656 2,760 4,197 2,960 4,780.2 3,786.7 5,269.6 4,246

Total govemment outlay (Sm) . 5,029

7,348

12,229

17,839

21,861

24,123

26,802

29,045

Commonwealth expenditure on

aged as %of total government ou-

tlay . . . . . . . . - 11.2% 9.3% 11.4% 9.4% 13.9% 12.2% 13.4% 10.8% 16.7% 12.6% 17.4% 12.3% 17.8% 14.1% 18% 14.6%

Gross domestic product (Sm) (re-

vised) . . . . . . . . .20,686

30,393

51,272

61,703

72,702

83,213

90,278

101,133

Commonwealth expenditure on

aged as % of gross domestic pro-

duct . . . . . . . . .. 2.7% 2.3% 2.8% 2.3% 3.3% 2.9% 3.9% 3.1% 5.0% 3.8% 5.0% 3.6% 5.3% 4.2% 5.2% 4.2%

Category (I)-Programs not confined specifically to the aged (but where the aged as a group may be significant) and those solely or principally for the aged. Category (2)-Programs, solely or principally for aged (a component of category I). Source: Figures for 1965-66, 1969-70, 1973-74, 1977-78 and 1978-79 are published on page 116 ofthe Report ofthe Auditor-General ofan Efficiency Audit into Commonwealth Adminlstrat/on ofNursing Home Programs and figures for other years were derived assuming the trend for 1977-78 and 1978-79 held in those years. Compiled at request by the statistics group ofthe Legislative Research Service.

Dr BLEWETT-The table shows unequivocally that the very significant increase, the very nice increase, which the honourable member talked about in terms of the GDP, took place in 1975-76 in the last Budget of the Whitlam Government. That is when the significant move forward took place-the achievements which the honourable member on 26 February 1981 boasted were achievements for which this Government ought to be proud and which the people of Australia should recognise. In fact, those achievements were the achievements of the Whitlam Government; they were not the achievements of the Fraser Government. The marginal increase in expenditure as a proportion of GDP since 1975-76 simply reflects the increase in the number of aged people in the population. On the care of the aged, as in all the social welfare fields, the very best that can be said of the Fraser Government is that at least it has maintained the very real achievements of the Whitlam Government.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.30)-Coal is Australia's greatest export earner and there are some great mines in the Paterson electorate.
Mr Cohen-Minds or mines? Mr O'KEEFE-Coal mines. They extend from Newcastle right up the Hunter Valley to Singleton, Muswellbrook and over the range to

Gunnedah and Boggabri. They then extend further down the Goulburn River and out to Ulan. These mines cause tremendous problems for local government in these areas in that local government is expected to provide the infrastructure for the mines such as roads, housing and other amenities. I pay tribute to the Singleton Shire Council for the wonderful way in which it has entered into the development of this industry and has assisted the mining companies. For their part, Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd, which is involved at Buchanan borehole, the Peko-Wallsend company and groups involved with other mines in the area are also providing infrastructure in the form of roads. A similar situation exists in the Muswellbrook area. Local government bodies have great difficulty providing not only roads but also water, sewerage, electricity and other amenities.
There is no doubt that the Government of New South Wales, which will profit most from these mines, will have to come to the party and assist in the provision of this infrastructure. The Ulan colliery, situated between Denman and Mudgee, is a huge mine which is being further developed. It is causing the Mudgee Shire Council concern because it has to spend money in the' town of Mudgee itself on roads and infrastructure in the

690 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Adjournment

way of housing for the miners and for the mine executives. The Federal Government is responsible for the funding of highways. Coal trucks ply between Singleton and the city of Maitland at the rate of one every two minutes, so one can imagine that the roads receive considerable wear and tear. There is no doubt that the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) will be approached by the Department of Main Roads for assistance in keeping these roads in tiptop order. Unfortunately the New South Wales Government has not kept up with the development of the coal mines in the Hunter Valley. It has failed to provide sufficient railway rolling stock; rail transport is being outnumbered by road transport at the rate of 100 to one. It has lagged behind also in the provision of rail facilities. However, a spur line has been built from the great mines at Warkworth to the main line at Whittingham, which is a few miles south of Singleton. The Sandy Hollow railway line is being developed. It was commenced in the 1940s but progress ceased with the advent of the war. Today, because of the Ulan colliery and the Mitsubishi development, the railway line is being constructed. There are many camps each with 150 or 200 men who are working on the construction of the line so that the coal from the Ulan colliery can be railed to Muswellbrook and then to the port at Newcastle. There are two coal loaders at the port of Newcastle and we need to provide one more. 1 note that the New South Wales Government is entering into negotiations with a commercial firm to establish another coal loader there. Unfortunately, in recent weeks there have been 26 to 30 ships waiting outside Newcastle to load coal because of the darg the shunters fixed on the quantity of coal the trains should carry to the port. That quantity was 500 tonnes. Unfortunately, industrial disputes of this nature do not do the coal export industry any good.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (10.35)-1 would like to use this opportunity to voice my concern and the concern of my electors at the threat of the introduction into Victoria of nuclear power stations. The threat has come from the State Electricity Commission of Victoria. 1 say at the outset that the SEC is a public utility not elected by or responsible to the people. It is the same public utility that builds towns in the Latrobe Valley and then decides to pull them down after it realises that it has built them on its own coal deposits.It is the same public utility that has decided to build a large power station in a populated area near the centre of Melbourne in the face of opposition

from the people around it who do not want to cop the pollution. So far this public utility has shown a callous disregard for the interest and health of the people of Victoria-the very people that it is supposed to serve.
1have long suspected that the SEC an irresponsible establishment has had secret plans to introduce nuclear reactors into Victoria. It was recently reported in the Melbourne Age that the SEC threatened to turn to nuclear power because of high standards imposed by the Environment Protection Authority. It called on the Victorian Government to lower those standards so it could continue to pollute the Latrobe Valley and to provide cheap electricity to Alcoa of Australia Ltd. It took exactly 24 hours for the Hamer Liberal Government to capitulate. It announced the next day that the EPA standards would be lowered. The lower standards enabled the SEC to produce and sell energy dirt cheap to foreign aluminium companies. So the immediate threat has been removed but it will be only a matter of time before the SEC proposes again the introduction of nuclear reactors to satisfy the greed of transnational companies for cheap energy.
Mr Fisher-What nonsense.
Mr KENT-The honourable member should listen; he will learn something. It is public knowledge that the SEC is sellIng electricity to Alcoa at Portland at a fraction of the normal cost. If the Government does not believe me it should listen to Mr Stone, the head of the Treasury, who said that Australia will not gain the full benefit of the resources boom if Federal and State governments do not adequately tax development companies or charge full costs for services provided. 1 repeat that he referred to charging the full costs for services provided. According to the Melbourne Age of 7 March the Treasury submission particularly criticised electricity charges which State governments set for aluminium companies. It said that State governments undervalued the coal used for power generation and calculated non-commercial rates of return on capital investment, with the result that electricity supplies to smelters have been underpriced.
Mr Fisher-What nonsense.
Mr KENT-The honourable member says 'What nonsense'. The Government's own head of the Treasury has said that. If we export our energy for a fraction of the price that it costs to produce, it is no wonder that foreign companies will queue up for more and more. Then that fact will be used as an excuse by the SEC to introduce nuclear power. The uranium miners and their advocate, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony),

Adjournment

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 691

\yould be only too happy to supply this deadly product to the domestic market, especially as they find it harder and harder to peddle their radioactive merchandise overseas. Of course, Mr Stone is quite right to advocate the introduction of a supertax on windfall profits of transnational companies that are assisted by Mr Hamer and Charles Court who are selling out our resources at bargain basement prices. I call on the Federal and State governments to have the courage to tax the transnational mining giants equitably and to use the revenue to promote solar energy instead of to make this the sinister move towards nuclear reactors.
Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (10.40)- The subject that I want to discuss briefly tonight may be called frivolous by many people. I want to talk about cricket. Thousands of people in my electorate of Eden-Monaro were waiting today to find out who were to be the members of the Australian side to go to England this year. It was very noticeable that despite the fact thatcricket has had its problems in the last few years there was a tremendous interest in the selection of the team. I believe there always will be tremendous interest, especially in the side that is to go to England. Cricket in this country has been not just a game, not just a way of spending an afternoon but a way of pulling ourselves together. That has been shown in many ways. In a sense it also has been the most political of games. In the days when Australia was a young country, still a colony, the fact that we were able to beat mother England in cricket was probably the most important factor in showing us that we could do well and that we were growing up. I say that very seriously. One comment that is probably slightly frivolousperhaps it should be recorded in the Hansard record-is that cricket also tied Federal-State relations together last Monday when an excellent side from this Parliament managed to thrash the New South Wales parliamentary side with a very well deserved win. I will not discuss the people who did well.
The selectors today chose a side which I imaginem.ost Australians will feel is fairly well balanced. It contains some of the great players of th~ past few years-players such as Dennis Lillee, Rodney Marsh and Allan Border. Of course, selectors always have their problems. Cricket also has brought forward some interesting younger players such as Dirk Wellham, a young New South Welshman from a cricketing family who has played very few Sheffield Shield games but who shows great promise. I imagine that'it is the essence of our philosophy in this country that the young people who can achieve, deserve credit and

in fact get it. That has not always been the case in some of the sides that we have opposed. I imagine people will have queries about some less obvious areas. I wonder why Bruce Yardley was not picked and why Ray Bright got the ticket. Maybe that shows that politics between States are involved. I imagine that, apart from one selection matter, there will be general applause at the side selected. The selection matter to which I refer concerns Doug Walters. Doug Walters is a man who, in cricketing terms, is getting on in years but this year he has had a magnificent season.
Mr McLean-He has got the runs on the board.
Mr SAINSBURy-It is true that he has had the runs on the board. He had the best average in the Test series. He played six Tests this year. In a sense, he made a real comeback. Doug Walters, probably more importantly, embodies that Australian characteristic of nonchalance, and at the same time possesses massive ability. He is a great hero in New South Wales and, I imagine, throughout Australia. A number of my colleagues from other States have commepted to me already that Doug Walters is a hero Australia-wide, a man we all look up to, a man who was not coached in the finer points of cricket at a younger age but a man, as I have said, who has massive ability. We are all very sad for Doug tonight that he will not be going away. I imagine that there is not much more to be said except to say to Doug Walters: If this is the end of your career, we certainly have enjoyed it. I wish the team good luck. IIi a sense, the members of that team are ambassadors for Australia. I hope that their behaviour lives up to the. behaviour of teams in the past which have done a darned sight more for Australia than many of our diplomats.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (10.45)-1 came into the House tonight with the same object in mind imd to speak in exactly the same terms as the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury). There is a degree of unanimity in the House that is rare, but our attitudes are different. The honourable member for Eden-Monaro was saddened but I am outraged at the failure to select Doug Walters for this team. I think it is the greatest disgrace in the history of Australian sport. I cannot think of another instance when a player of such outstanding ability has been omitted from art Australian side. I think that all the selectors ought to be sacked immediately and Walters ought to be part of this team to go to England. Millions of Australians will be outraged at what has happened.
I was speechless when I heard the team announced tonight. I asked myself why Doug

692 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Adjournment

Walters was not selected. Excuses were being made in the newspapers earlier this week. We were told firstly that the reason he would not be selected was that he was too old. What absolute nonsense. I point to the fact that Geoff Boycott is, I think, 40 years or 41 years of age. He is probably now batting better than at any time in his life. He is now the best-not the second best-batsman in the world. He is in the West Indies with the English side and is getting many runs. Walters is five years to six years younger than Boycott. Don Bradman was still scoring centuries at 40 years of age. One can go on to refer to other cricketers in their forties who have been--
Mr Howard-Wilfred Rhodes started at forty-six.
Mr COHEN-Wilfred Rhodes and Jack Hobbs are two to whom I could refer. One can go on and on. That excuse is utter nonsense.
Mr McLean-What about Bruce Yardley?
Mr COHEN-I am concerned about Walters primarily because he came back into the Australian side this year, scored his fifteenth century and has topped the batting averages. The next reason we were given was that Doug Walters does not do well enough in England. Without trying to take away from some people in the side, I ask: How did John Dyson get in? He has had about 11 or 12 innings aT,ld has never scored more than 30 runs this season. He has been to England, has not performed well but is in the side. One could go on to ask the same qll:estions about other players who have been selected. I really do not think I should pick out other players for this sort ofcriticism.
The point is that Walters has done everything that could possibly be asked of him. If he had just had an ordinary season we would expect him to retire gracefully but he has done everything-he has batted well in the Sheffield Shield, topped the batting averages and scored a century. He is not old but has reached the relatively mature age, for a cricketer, of 35. And this has happened in his benefit year. What a humiliation the selectors have placed on this man who has been one of the greatest cricketer this country has ever known. I think it is a shame. What we ought to do is to have a march for Doug Walters next week down the main street of every capital city.
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (10.49)-1 reflect and reaffirm the remarks of the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) and the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) with regard to the selection of the Australian cricket team. Having done that, tonight I wish to congratulate the Tonkin Government of South Australia on its initiatives in restructuring

and upgrading the Department of Tourism, hence providing initiatives for the tourist industry in that State. These initiatives were announced today.
Mr John Brown-It is time it did something. It has taken it a long time.
Mr CHAPMAN-It has not taken the South Australian Government all that long. It has been in office only a little over 12 months. It was the previous Labor Government that was so slack in this regard. The extra tourist trade which this initiative will promote will most surely create new jobs in a State which needs economic growth and jobs to overcome years of stagnation under previous Labor administrations. The State Government intends to generate an extra $90m of revenue by increasing the number of visitor nights spent in South Australia to the level of the national average. In turn, this will help to create an additional 3,000 jobs. The South Australian Government is aiming to keep South Australian holidaymakers in their own State. In my electorate of Kingston such a move is very welcome. Tourism is a valuable industry in any State or country. Many European countries, for example, rely on tourism as a primary resource of national income.
Last year the tourist industry earned South Australia $219m while, by way of comparison, the motor vehicle industry earned it $770m. Tourism at the moment is earning more money for South Australia than the mining industry. It also employs many more people than that latter industry. In fact 9,000 jobs depend directly on this industry and another 17,000 depend in some way upon it. Promotion of South Australia has already been substantial overseas, with a seminar and exhibition recently held in London initiated by the Premier, the Honourable David Tonkin. Through the Australian Tourist Commission also the State of South Australia is being continually marketed as a peaceful and very appealing place to visit. The Barossa Valley, Australia's best known wine producing district, the Coorong River, the biannual Festival of Arts as well as areas within my electorate, around Willunga and McLaren Vale, are all renowned for their uniqueness.
Mr Jacobi-And good wine too.
Mr CHAPMAN-And very good wine from McLaren Vale as well as from the Barossa Valley, as the honourable member for Hawker interjects. In addition at least two new world class hotels are being built in the Adelaide area, signifying the confidence expressed by the private sector in the future of tourism in that State.

Adjournment

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 693

One of the most notable and beneficial initiatives is the provision of loan capital up to $5m through the State Bank of South Australia to develop tourist projects. I commend the South Australian Government on these initiatives and look forward to the jobs that they will create in that State in the future. These initiatives will multiply the benefits which the tourist industry is already deriving from initiatives taken by the present Federal Government. Promotion of Australia overseas occurs through trade delegations, consulates and missions as well as products unique to Australia. The film industry, already gaining great attention overseas, has been greatly boosted with the recently announced tax allowances. The former Minister, now Mr Justice Ellicott, deserves commendation for the tremendous contribution that he made to this area and to all areas of the promotion of Australia both to Australians and to overseas countries.
The Government has taken certain initiatives, including an increase in the budget of the Australian Tourist Commission to $8.9m this financial year including $300,000 for domestic tourist promotion and the passing of legislation to remove the present specific exclusion from the investment allowance of plant for use in connection with amusement or recreation. In addition substantial funds have been provided in this financial year for the development of airports and a national tourism outlook conference which will be held in Canberra in April this year to provide a forum fordiscussion of possible future policy initiatives for the 1980s. As a result there has been substantial growth in the tourist industry throughout Australia. There has been a 17.3 per cent increase in accommodation takings by hotels and motels to the June quarter of 1980, compared with 1979, and a 4.7 per cent increase in employment in tourist establishments.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CHAPMAN-So these benefits both at Federal and State levels contribute greatly to the industry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat when he is called to order.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (10.54)-1 must draw the attention of the House to a matter in my electorate of Ballarat that is causing great concern to a large number of citizens of that city. I refer to the decision of the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) to agree to reduce the funding to the Community Youth Support

Scheme project in Ballarat. This project is certainly not the only one to be pruned by the Government this year, but that it should be pruned at all, given the continuing need for its services, is shameful indeed. Other projects around the country have also been pruned or discontinued. To be fair, not all have been the victims of decreased funding, but many have. This fact cannot be denied by the Minister or by any of the honourable gentlemen opposite. As I said, these CYSS projects are not all without their problems and it is not surprising that this should be so. Staff have no security of tenure, training is quite inadequate,. guidelines are restrictive and funding is always short term. Long term planning and continuity of programming rely upon the idealism of the project officers. Ballarat's CYSS, under the direction of the Local Young Men's Christian Association, is a very good project. If the encouragement is given to it, it will continue to provide sorely needed services to the unemployed youth of Ballarat for a long time.
At a recent meeting in Ballarat the office of the Commonwealth Employment Service indicated that 600 young people in the district were eligible for the Government's latest much publicised youth training project. It might be of interest to honourable members to learn that only two courses were able to be directly organised for these people, which meant that only 30 of the 600 could take part. A further 22 or so young people could be found places in existing technical and further education courses if they fitted the programs. Yet the Government feels able to cut funding to the CYSS program. This year alone there is a cut in real terms of 10 per cent in funds allocated to the program throughout the nation. I challenge the Minister to come clean and to indicate his real intentions with regard to these projects. We want some honest and candid comment on the Government's policy. For too long we have been treated to a series of vague or motherhoodtype Matements tbat seem to bear little relation to the reality of the situation. Only today at Question Time the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made reference to the transition-to-work program. I suggest that the Prime Minister has little contact with the work place. I applaud the valiant efforts of those concerned to put flesh on the bones of the transition-to-work program, but like so many other ad hoc youth programs, it does not co-ordinate well with other youth training programs, showing what a dog's breakfast effort the Government's policy really is.
This is the second year that there has been a decrease in real terms of funds available to Community Youth Support Scheme projects. So much

/

694 REJ;>RESENTATIVES 11 Man;h 1981

Adjournment,

for the Government's credibility in this regard. Where is the evidence that would help us to see some sign ofgenuine concern for the vulnerable young people of this country? For many years.to come they will bear the scars of the indifference of this Government to their needs. There is no doubt that the destruction of hope for these young Australians will be a permanent reminder to future generations of the base values of this Government, and the pious platitudes of the Minister bear witness to its notorious record of hypocrisy.

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.57)~Tonight

the honourable member for Bonython (Dr

Blewett) chose to criticise statements that I had

made in the House which were based on facts and

statistics from the Report of the Auditor-General

on an Efficiency Audit into nursing homes, by

choosing to dt;nigrate me, by attacking me as a

shonky manipulator of figures, rather than to con-

centrate his attack on the figures.

.

Mr Howard-Who was that?

Mr BAUME'"'-This is the style of the honourable member for Bonython.

Mr Howard-He is the rising man from South Australia, isn't he?

MrUAUME---:-That is the chap. I imagine that his reputation for academic integrity would not be
assisted by this kind of personal abuse if he were
seeking to make it fair and reasonable point about
the figures. He complained that I had taken the only available figures, which are in the Auditor-. General's report, and had quoted the differences between them in the various years. He then attacked my position by getting a set of figures which were not official but which were derived, assuming the trend for 1977-78 and 1978-79 held for the years that he held up to me as evidence of my alleged shonkiness. It seems to me that the honourable member for Bonython, having invented some figures to endeavour to disprove my proposition and then having abused me, might have been better served had he conceded the fact that since this Government has been in power, on his figures, the proportion of the gross domestic product spent by the Commonwealth Government on the aged has increased from 3.8 per cent under his Government to 4.2 per cent. It is a significant increase which the honourable member for Bonython sought dishonestly-I underline that word-to disprove.

Mr Scholes-That is out of order, of course.

Mr BAUME-And the word 'shonky' is out of order. The majority of the words that the honourable member for Bonython used against me are unparliamentary and I find them offensive. I find

it extraordinary thatthe honourable members opposite who found nothing to object about at the time, are now prepared to object. The fact is that, under this Government, Commonwealth expenditure on the aged as a percentage of total government outlay has gone up from 12.5 per cent, according to the figures given by the honourable member for Bonython, to 14.6 per cent.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being II o'clock the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.

NOTICE Mr Hodges to move:
That this House-
l. endorses the feelings of those Au~tralians who, by recent marches, have demonstrated their concern at the frequency of strikes and bans which have so disrupted the everyday life of the ordinary Australian;
2. urges in:~mb~rs of trade unions to demand that their . leadership and the executive ofthe A.C.T.U. cease their present confrontation with the Australian community through repeated industrial disruption.
3. expresses concern at the unjustifiable effect of strikes and bans on employment opportunities for young and old, their impact on inflation, as well as the international reputation of Australia.'
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliament House: Disposal of Waste Paper
Mr L~s Johnson to ask Mr Speaker-
(1) .' What arrangements are in operation for the disposal of waste paper from Parliament House.
(2) Is the disposal of waste paper conducted by a (a) public instrumentality or (b) private contract.
(3) If disposal is by private contract, were tenders called prior to letting the contract.
(4) If so, (a) how many tenders were, received, (b) who was the successful tenderer and (c) what are the terms and conditions of the contract.
(5) If ten.ders were not called, who disposes of the waste paper from Parliament House and what are the terms and conditions of this arrangeinent.

REPLY TO A ~EQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION

Department of the Parliamentary Library

Dr Theophanous asked Mr Speaker, on 27 November 1980-

(1) How many positions in the Department of Parliamen-

tary Library were (a) vacant or (b) occupied by a person act-

ing in the position as at close of business on 10 November

1980.

.

(2) With respectto each position referred to in part (1), (a) what was the position (i) number and (ii) designation and (b) how long has the position been vacant or occupied by a person acting in it.

Reply to a Requestfor Information

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 695

(3) Has the Parliamentary Librarian directed that vacant positions are not to be advertised at this time; if so, why; if not, when are the vacancies to be advertised or the position to be occupied by a person subtantively.
Mr SPEAKER-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 9; (b) 16.
(2) (a), (i), (ii); (b)-

Position number Designation

Length of vacancy (V) or acting occupation (A)

4

Legislative Research Special-

ist,Grade3

9 months

(A)

9

Legislative Research Special-.

ist, Grade 2

3 months

(V)

27

Clerical Assistant, Grade S 3 weeks

(A)

29

Librarian, Class 1

Sdays

(V)

30

Librarian, Class 2

Sdays

. (A)

32

Librarian, Class 1

3 days

(V)

37

Clerical Assistant, Grade 2 6 days

(V)

40

Clerical Assistant, Grade 2

2 months

(A)

43

Clerk, Class 4

11 days

(A)

SO

Clerical Assistant, Grade 3 1 month

(V)

61

Assistant Library Officer

7 days

(A)

67

Clerical Assistant, Grade 1 2 months

(V)

73

Legislative Research Special-

ist, Grade 3

4 months

(A)

76

Legislative Research Special-

ist,GradeS

3 months

(A)

81

Clerical Assistant, Grade 2

3 months

(A)

94

Clerical Assistant, Grade 4 4 days

(A)

9S

Legislative Research Special-

ist, Grade S

Smonths

(A)

102 Clerical Assistant, Grade 1 1 month

(V)

108 Legislative Research Special-

ist, Grade 3

12 days

(A)

109 Legislative Research Special-

ist,Grade3

2 months

(V)

110 Legislative Research Special-

ist,Grade 3

2 months

(V)

Position number Designation

Length of vacancy (V) or acting occupation (A)

lIS Librarian, Class 2

1 day

(A)

120 Legislative Research Special-

ist,Grade5

9 months

(A)

128 Clerical Assistant, Grade 3 2 months

(A)

130 Legislative Research Special-

ist, Grade 3

5mon\hs

(A)

(3) No. The following positions were advertised on the dates shown:

Position number

Advertising date

4

29.1.81

30

4.9.80

37

6.11.80

43

30.IO.S0

SO

4.9.80

61

20.11.80

73

30.10.80

120

2S.9.80

128

3.9.S0

130

28.8.80

The following are the details regarding the other positions listed under (2) (a):
32-Librarian, Class I-filled by the internal promotion of a Library Officer.
102-Clerical Assistant, Grade I-for base grade Clerical Assistants applicants are supplied by the Commonwealth Employment Service.
The other positions (9,27,29,40,67,76,81,94, 9S, lOS, 109, 110, 115) are substantively occupied but were listed as vacant because their substantive (or nominal) occupant on 10 November 1980 was engaged on duties in another position, e.g. on higher duties, or absent on leave.

696 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Chloroform in Toothpaste
(Question No. 41)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

Have steps been taken by any of the Australian States to ban or restrict the use of chloroform as an ingredient in toothpaste; if so, (a) what steps have been taken and (b) on what medical basis have such actions bec;n taken.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I am not aware that any Australian State has taken steps to

ban the use of chloroform as an ingredient in toothpaste.

However, for marly years preparations (including toothpaste)

containing more than 10 per cent chloroform have been sub-

ject to poisons scheduling. More recently, in October 1978,

the National Health and Medical Research Council

(NH&MRC) recommended that those preparations contain-

ing 10 pet cent or less of chloroform should also be subject to

scheduling unless the chloroform content is declared on the

label of the preparation. The appropriate scheduling of these

preparations, without a declaration on the label, would be

Schedule 2. Schedule 2 applies to 'substances which are for

therapeutic use and which require supervision of their distri-

bution, such that their retail sale should be restricted to phar-

macies, and, where there is no pharmacy service available,

general dealers in medicinal poisons'. Adoption of this rec-

ommendation into State and Territory legislation is con-

sidered to be adequate in the light of present toxicological

data.

'

The recommendation followed concern at a report, which was subsequently shown to be unfounded, that chloroform
had a carcinogenic potential in animals. Nevertheless the NH&MRC considered it should alert the public to the pres-
ence of a drug in toothpaste, by either labelling or scheduling.

Secondary and Tertiary Education
(Question No. 133)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is there any substance to reports that he made a statement blaming the standard of education for Australia's youth unemployment problem.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs Newsletter No. II of September 1980 headed 'We risk being under-educated' which quotes Mr Justice Kirby, Chairman of the Law Reform Commision, as saying that Australia has one of the worst records for retaining children in secondary and tertiary education.
(3) Is he able to say whether the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development figures show that while the United States of America has 78.2% of its 17 years age group in full-time secondary education, Japan has 88.1 % and Australia has only 31.2%.
(4) Has the Government reduced real expenditure for (a) universities by 8.8% (b) colleges of advanced education by 8% (c) schools by 0.25% and (d) overall assistance for students by 4.5%; ifso, why.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) See answer to Q 134 (House of Representatives Hansard, 4 December 1980, page 469).
(2) Yes.
(3) The figures quoted are correct but need to be considered in the light of the structure of Australian education, which allows 17 year olds to participate in tertiary education at this age. For example, in 1979, 31.9 per cent of 17 year olds were in full-time secondary edUcation, 4.0 per cent in full-time university education, 3.7 per cent in full-time college education and 4.2 per cent in full-time technical and further education. It is also estimated that a further 20 per cent of 17 year olds are participating in part-time education mainly in technical and further education. Thus, in Australia, 17 year olds have a choice of remaining on at secondary school, entering tertiary education full-time, joining the labour force and entering tertiary education part-time or joining the labour force and not continuing with education at all. In 1979 some 63 per cent of 17 year olds were participating in education on a full-time or part-time basis.
(4) (a) to (d) On 22 May 1980, I announced the levels of funding for the programs of the Schools Commission and the Tertiary Education Commission for 1981. In real terms, expenditure on universities in 1981 has been reduced by 1.2 per cent compared with 1980 and expenditure on colleges of advanced education by 1.7 per cent, while expenditure on schools has been increased by 3.1 per cent. The reductions for universities and colleges of advanced education reflect lower commitments in the capital works programs in these sectors, while expenditure on recurrent purposes has been maintained at the same real level, and expenditure on equipment has been increased slightly over the level for 1980. In addition to these provisions, the new initiatives announced by the Government in the election context will enhance the level of funds for both the schools and tertiary sectors from 1981.
The Government has not reduced rea' expenditure for overall assistance for students. In 1980 expenditure on all schemes was $214 million. In 1981 an additional $40.7 million is expected to be spent, i.e. an increase of 19%.
Disabled Children
(Question No. 319)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
( I) Has the Government examined the granting of special financial assistance to parents of disabled children to provide for essential alterations to family homes to accommodate disabled children; if so, what forms of assistance have been examined.
(2) What is the estimated cost of each of the assistance measures examined referred to in part (I).
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) Yes. On 19 August 1980, following the Treasurer's Budget Speech, I announced details of a new program under which a range of aids to daily living would be provided to disabled people of all ages not eligible for assistance under existing assistance schemes. Under the new Program of Aids for Disabled People, which is planned to commence later this year, assistance will include home modifications such as access

Answers to Questions

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 697

ramps; door widenings and fittings; alterations to toilets, baths, shower recesses, wash basins, cabinets, shelving, benches, taps, handles, power outlets and light switches; and provision of internal or external hand-rails or grips.
(2) $700,000 is available for this new program for the period I April-30 June 198 \. It is impracticable to estimate costs of home modifications to be made available under the program. Guidelines will be developed to achieve an appropriate balance between costs to the public and disabled people's needs for home modifications as assessed with expert advice.
Expenditure on Advertising for Prospective Immigrants
(Question No. 579)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) What was the total expenditure on advertising for prospective immigrants for (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) the 6 months to December 1980.
(2) In which countries were these funds used and what was the total expenditure in each country.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 1976-77-$109,157,1977-78-$117,931, 1978-79-$245,006, 1979-80-$305,511, 6 months to December 1980 $26,466.
(2) 1976-77-expenditure was in Britain only. 1977-78expenditure was in Britain only. 1978-79-Britain $214,626. Federal Republic of Germany $14,455, Netherlands $12,495, Italy $3,430. 1979-80-Britain $258,785, Italy $2,Q63, Spain $1,148, Switzerland $1,090, Federal Republic of Germany $24,448, Netherlands $17,977. 1980-81 to December 1980....,. Britain $25,756 expended or committed, The Hague $710 expended or committed.
Promotional activities currently are targeted to particular groups rather than direct advertising in the mass media. Advertising on a small scale is mainly to meet a demand for specific occupations where employees are not available in Australia. Some material seeks to attract entrepreneurs whose investment and business skills will create more jobs and also to confirm that Australia has an ongoing migration program.
Indirect advertising to encourage applicants to attend information/counsellirig evenings has some promotional results. The information/counselling sessions are conducted primarily with the aim of reducing settlement difficulties in Australia.
Death of Dr Shik Aun Low
(Question No. 651)
Mr Jarman, asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
Has his attention been drawn to reports concerning the recent death of a Dr Shik Aun Low; if so, is he able to provide details of this case.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. My attention has been brought to various reports concerning the recent death of Dr Shik Aun Low of Perth. These include articles' The Bulletin of 20 January 1981 and 10 March 1981 by Mr Robert Drewe.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman has been asked by. Dr Low's widow (Mrs Sabrina Low), to look into the actions of officers of my Department and of the Australian Federal

Police. At the time of The Bulletin's first article, therefore, I considered the matter to be in effect sub judice.
I regret that my Private Secretary's conversations with Mr Drewe were not accurately reported. My view was that it is not appropriate for me to comment on some aspects of the issue while it is under consideration by the Commonwealth Ombudsman. This was made quite clear to Mr Drewe by my Private Secretary.
Parliament established the office of Ombudsman to investigate complaints about administrative actions of Commonwealth officers. The Ombudsman has wide-ranging powers to question officers or other persons and to obtain information. While there is no legal prohibition against my having commented on a matter under consideration by the Ombudsman, I still feel it both courteous and proper not to prejudice the issues by comments on complaints relating to actions of officers of my Department.
However, in view of the manner in which Mr Drewe presented certain information in his first article and his failure to include other pertinent details, I decided. to respond to the Bulletin and sent my comments by telex on 12 February 1981.
I understood this was in time for the next issue of the Bulletin appearing on 18 February 1981. I regret that only a relatively small part of my telex was incorporated in Mr Drewe's article on this same matter in that publication on 10 March 198\. I further regret that Mr Drewe has again failed to present all the facts available to him.
In view of this, I set out below the text of my telexes of 12 February 1981 and 10 March 1981 to the Editor of the Bulletin, which will provide the honourable member with the information he has requested.
'Sir,
May I comment on some aspects of the articles written by Mr Robert Drewe concerning the late Dr Shik Aun Low, of Perth (Bulletin, January 20 and 27,1981).
I have been reluctant to enter into public discussion on the matter because of my concern to ensure that those people suffering because of Dr Low's unfortunate death were not caused any more grief. It Is also my view that it is inappropriate for me to comment on any issue that is under consideration by the Commonwealth Ombudsman and, as such, to date I have considered the matter to be in effect sub-judice. I am advised that both these points were made to Mr Drewe by my Private Secretary, Mr John Short, and I regret that his tf}lephone conversations with Mr Drewe were not accurately reported.
However, I have now chosen to comment on this case because of the manner in which Mr Drewe presented certain information in his article while at the same time failing to include other pertinent details. I now believe that the following facts need to be presented to your readers:
Dr Low was convicted in 1978 on the first' ten charges of a group of 149 charges preferred against him. The reason for dealing with only ten charges was that this number was considered to be one which a jury could be reasonably asked to consider at anyone trial.
The remaining 139 charges were to be left in abeyance until the outcome of the first trial was known.
Following Dr Low's conviction on the ten charges, involving a sum of $172.50, and prior to his sentencing upon those charges, Dr Low voluntarily repaid an amount of $2381.25, in respect of the total number of charges.
Dr Low was subsequently sentenced upon the ten charges and sought leave to appeal against the conviction. His application for leave to appeal was dismissed by the court of criminal appeal.

698 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Following the dismissal of that application, representations were made to the Attorney-General on his behalf by his legal advisers, and the result was that the outstanding 139 charges were not proceeded with.

With the criminal matters disposed of, the Deputy Crown Solicitor in Perth was instructed to look at the possibility of civil action against Dr Low for other monies considered to be owing by him over and above the sum he had repaid.

The basis of this recovery would have been that, just as

the ten charges which went to trial were a sample of the 149

charges preferred, so were the 149 charges preferred a

sample only of the activity of a like nature engaged in by Dr

Low.

-

I would add here that your readers should be; mindful of the comments of the trial judge in 1978 who said amongst other thingS that Dr Low "initiated a deliberate and systematic practice designed to defraud the authority, Medibank, and indeed carried it out".

I mention these details only to demonstrate that the facts surrounding the action taken against Dr Low in 1978 do not support the underlying theme of Mr Drewe's article that Dr Low had beeh victimised, possibly for racial reasons.

Turning now to the events concerning Dr Low in 1980 I would say at the outset that on the basis of all the information I have received to date, I must reject the imputation contained.in Mr Drewe's article that the Department was, in fact, lying in wait for Dr Low to make a furtner mistake once he resumed practice.

The action which led to his arrest on 22 October 1980 was initiated after my Department's Perth Offic~ received a
complaint from a patient-quite unsolicited-about amounts being charged by Dr Low. After receipt of this complaint, my Department, in line with established pro-
cedures, sought to determine whether the complaint was of substance. Under these procedures an investigation is carried out to establish whether there is any substance to the allegations received.

The Department also attempts to establish if there is any malice or other motive in bringing complaints to its at.ten-
tion. In this case it was considered that Dr Low's billing arrangements were such as to warrant reference to the Australian Federal Police for further inquiry.

On the basis of the information supplied to me and my own inquiries-following the appearance of Mr Drewe's
article I again examined the matter in some detail-I believe that my Department had no alternative but to refer
the matter to the Australian Federal Police for their investigation of possible offences against the law.

I would remind your readers that my Department is
charged with the responsibility of ensuring proper payment of medical benefits and the protection of taxpayers' funds. If the Department had hot undertaken the inquiries it did, after confirmation of the first complaint, it could have been said to have failed to carry out its proper duties.

I would add that after the. investigation by my Department commenced it was found that a Western Australian
health insurance fund had been-totally without the knowledge of the Department-conducting its own internal monitoring of accounts submitted to it by Dr Low's patients.

In his article Mr Drewe made much of claims that Dr Low made constant attempts to clarify the issues involved and seek information from my Department. However, the essential fact about those letters is that they largely related to issues other than those which directly formed the basis of the charges subsequently laid-Dr Low's letters basically sought a ruling on the interpretation of item 8105 in the

Answers to Questions

Medical Benefits schedule whereas the charges on which he was subsequently arrested centred on whether particular items of service had or had not been performed as claimed by Dr Low.

With regard to Dr Low's letters which were said to be unanswered, I would make the following points:

In his letter of 22 September, 1980, Dr Low sought clarification of the interpretation of an item in the Medical Benefits Schedule; this clarification was given in an answer by my Department's Perth Office on I October 1980. A request in that letter for an interview such as on 'any other matter that needs to be clarified so that further investigation would not be necessary' was discussed with the Australian Federal Police who asked that this matter be left to them to consider in making their investigations.
The letter dated I October 1980 received from Dr Low's solicitors was not responded to on advice from the Deputy Crown Solicitor.

It is also relevant to know that during a telephone call by
Dr Low to a medical counsellor in my Department's Perth
Office on 10 September, 1980, the counsellor offered to go to his rooms to discuss with him Medical Benefits Schedule itemisation matters. Dr Low, however, declined the offer,
stating that he would instead forward a letter he had already written.

I believe that I should also state here that Mr Drewe did not mention that it was stated in open Court on 28 October 1980 that further charges were to be laid against Dr Low at his next Court appearance. These charges related to other patients. With reference to his allegation thar 'there was one case in Western Australia where a sum of over $10,000 was involved and the doctor was allowed to pay it back, that being the end of the affair', my Department cannot identify any such case.

I am sure your readers will accept that it is not appropri-

ate for me to comment on a number of other matters raised

by Mr Drewe"":for example the method of Dr Low's arrest

and the size of the bail set. However I would make the fol-

lowing general points:

.

Under the investigation procedures followed by my pepartment a clear distinction is made between mistakes and fraud, both with respect to bulk billed accounts and other accounts. If, when investigating a complaint from a patient or reviewing a doctor's claim, it is established that a genuine mistake has occurred the matter is taken up with the doctor. Where there is substantial evidence that offences may have been deliberately committed the Department refers the matter to the Australian Federal Police for investigation. The question of any ensuing prosecution also involves the Deputy Crown Solicitor's office and any proceedings are subject to the rules of evidence and due legal process.

The Government's view-and it is a view supported by the Australian Medical Association-is that medical practitioners who set out to deliberately defraud the medical benefits system by claiming for services they do .not provide are to be prosecuted without hesitation and to the full extent of the law. The Government does not believe that any section of the community should be above the law.

Finally let me assure you that Dr Low's death was ex-

\remely distressing for me and the Commonwealth officers

involved in th~case an~ all of i1shave enormous sympathy

for his family. I expect that all those people who were close

to Dr Low deeply regret the publicity that has ensued since

his death.

.

I am sure that the Ombudsman's investigation will prove to be in the best interest of all those involved as Parliament has afforded to his office wide-rangiilg powers which allow

Answers to Questions

11 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 699

,him to investigate the administrative action of Commonwealth officers. As such the Ombudsman should be able to determine once and for all if there is any merit in any of the complaints against Commonwealth officers.
M. J. R. MacKELLAR MINISTER FOR HEALTH, CANBERRA'
'Dear Sir,
I was disturbed to read the most recent article by Mr Robert Drewe concerning my Department's investigation of doctors who allegedly defraud the medical benefits system and, in particular, its handling of the case of the late Dr Shik Aun Low (the Bullelin. 10 March 1981). I believe that it again dllmonstrated that Mr Drewe has failed to properly inform your readers as to all the facts concerning my Department's handling of its investigations of Dr Low.
As you wiII be aware I sent a telex to you on 12 February 1981 fully setting out the relevant facts concerning those investigations; its length was in excess of four pages. I regret that you have seen fit to allow Mr Drewe to selectively quote a minor part of my telex instead of producing it in full and allowing your readers to decide for themselves whether the' position adopted by Mr Drewe in his first article was correct.
I will not seek to redress in this letter the imbalances in Mr Drewe's first article. I would hope that you wiII now see fit to reproduce it in full. However, I would draw your attention to the fact that I stated in my telex that I have examined my Department's investigation of this case on two occasions-once before the appearance of Mr Drewe's first article and again after that article appeared. On the basis of those examinations I believe that my Department had no alternative but to refer the matter to. the Australian Federal Police for their investigation of possible offences . against the law. And as I also stated in that telex, I do not support the underlying theme of Mr Drewe's"article that Dr Low had been victimised, possibly for racial reasons.
As I stated at the outset, I was disturbed to read Mr Drewe's latest article. This article, like his first article, is highly emotive, presenting only the 'facts' that fit a predetermined view of the matter and, to some extent, distorting those facts. For example, in the opening section of his latest article Mr Drewe states that on October 28, 1980, Dr Low appeared in Court on three charges and that the money involved in these charges totalled $50. He failed to add that it had been stated in Court that day that further charges were to be laid against Dr Low at his next Court appearance. As you wiII recall, I made this point in my earlier telex.
More importantly, Mr Drewe attempts to support his earlier claim that Dr Low was victimised by implying-but never stating outright-that the woman named in the charges laid against him last October-Mrs Giambazi-did not initiate any complaint against Dr Low and, in fact, was approached by my Department.
It is correct that Mrs Giambazi was approached by my Department during an investigation of Dr Low. However, I should point out that Mrs Giambazi was not the original complainant. As I stated ip my telex, the action which led to Dr Low's arrest was mitiated after my Department received an unsolicited complaint about the amounts he had charged for certain services. And, as my Department advised the Ombudsman, following this complaint approaches were made to the Health Insurance Commission, The Hospital Benefits Fund of Western Australia and the Friendly Societies Health Services to obtain information necessary to allow a full and proper investigation of

the matter. It was as a result of those actions that the Department established that Mrs Giambazi was a patient of Dr Low.
Despite the statement in my telex about the original complaint against Dr Low being unsolicited, Mr Drewe did not seek advice from my office as to whether Mrs Giambazi was, in fact, the original complainant or the facts concerning the approach made to her by my Department.
I should emphasise here that it is the Government's view-and it is a view supported by the Australian Medical Association-that medical practitioners who set out to deliberately defraud the medical benefits system by claiming for services they did not provide are to be prosecuted without hesitation and to the full extent of the law. The Government does not believe that any section of the community should be above the law. My Department is charged with the responsibility of ensuring proper payment ofmedical benefits and the protection of taxpayers' funds. If the Department had not undertaken the inquiries it did after confirmation of the first ,complaint against Dr Low, it could have been said to have failed to carry.out its proper duties.
As I said in my telex, Dr Low's death was extremely distressing to me and the Commonwealth officers involved in the case. I regret that Mr Drewe has, by selectively quoting certain information, portrayed it as an attempt by my Department to victimise Dr Low for racial reasons. I do ,not believe that that was the case and feel that Mr Drewe's articles have unnecessarily distressed all those who were close to Dr Low and a large number of doctors. I also do not believe that Asian doctors (to use Mr Drewe's own words) are victimised by my Department. However, should any of the unnamed doctors quoted by Mr Drewe-or any other person-wish to contact me inrel!\tion to such claims, I will personally examine them to determine whether there is any substance to those accusations.
Yours faithfully, M. J. R. MacKELLAR
The Ombudsman has informed me that he is proceeding to conduct a formal investigation into the complaint by Mrs Low, and I look forward to being informed of the outcome of that investigation.
Nugan Hand Bank Mr ,Malcolm Fraser-On 5 March 1981 (Hansard, page 452) the honourable member for Oxley (Mr Hayden) asked me a question without notice concerl1ing allegations of CIA involvement with the Nugan Hand Bank.
In providing information on the honourable member's question I stated that if there was any additional information I would make it available to him.
Honourable members should be aware, that some sixteen or seventeen enterprises include the words 'Nugan Hand' in their name. Not all are Australian registered and not all appear to have operated within Australia. For instance the Nugan Hand Bank, to which the Leader of the Opposition referred in his question, was registered in the Cayman Islands. Nugan Hand Limited, to which Mr Justice Woodward-the NSW Royal Commissioner into Drug Trafficking-referred in his Second Report, was incorporated in Australia.

700 REPRESENTATIVES 11 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Nugan Hand operated through an intricate web of corporations in Australia and overseas.
Setting aside sensationalist reports and speculation, the Commonwealth Government is most concerned about evidence of apparently illegal activities by the Nugan Hand group. The Commonwealth Government acted speedily after Mr Justice Woodward recommended that an appropriate law enforcement group should investigate the Nugan Hand group, arising from evidence of its involvement with criminals known to be themselves involved in drug trafficking.
I took the initiative of approaching the Premier of NSW on 26 August 1980, seeking the widening of the terms of reference of the NSW/Commonwealth Joint Task Force on Drug Trafficking to enable it to investigate breaches by Nugan Hand of Commonwealth laws as well as of State laws. This special police group is investigating whether there was any criminal activity particularly drugrelated, in or affecting Australia, by any persons connected with Nugan Hand activities, and, if so, identifying such persons so that appropriate action could be initiated.
I also offered the assistance of the Commonwealth to the NSW Corporate Affairs Commission in its separate inquiry into the financial affairs of Nugan Hand.
Turning to allegations of CIA involvement with Nugan Hand, as I informed the Leader of the Opposition on 5 March, any operations of the United

States in Australia would be declared to the Australian Government and consequently agreed by the Australian Government. Officers from U.S. agencies working in Australia are declared to the Australian authorities and work with various Australian agencies.
In this connection I draw the attention of honourable members to my statement made on 24 May 1977 (Hansard, pages 1695 and 1696) in which I reassured the Parliament that on review the activities of the United States Government in Australia had been found to be fully consistent with the interests and policies of the Australian Government and people. The Government is satisfied with the assurances received from elements of its own administration and from the United States Government, that neitherthe United States Government nor its representatives were involved in improper or inappropriate activities here. Beyond these general assurances, satisfactory specific assurances on this matter were obtained last year from Australian authorities and the United States Government.
The Government has no evidence that the Nugan Hand group was co-operating with the se- . curity services of any foreign power to interfere in Australia's domestic affairs.
If the Leader of the Opposition has anyevidence relating to the affairs of the Nugan Hand group I invite him to provide it to the appropriate authorities.


