House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Wednesday, 25 February 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and StGeorge, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of StJohn of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-Gerreral

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.C. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.C. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourgb]e Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members ofthe House of Representatives
Speaker-The Righi Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.C.M.G., Q.C. Chairman ofCommillees and DeputySpeaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen ofCommittees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader ofthe House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader ofthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Lepderofthe Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader ofthe Liberal Party ofAustralia-The Righi Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader ofthe Liberal Party ofAustralia-The Righi Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.C.M.G.
Leader ofthe National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader ofthe National Country Party ofAustralia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader ofthe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader ofthe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.C. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Goodluck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, W.A. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, W.A.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, W.A.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, W A. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, W.A. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,W.A. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.C.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, K.C.M.G., Q.C.
Spender, John Michael, Q.C. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, W.A. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, W.A. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, W.A. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, W.A. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, W.A. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Goodluck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher ofthe Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk ofCommittees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk ofthe House-J. A. Petti fer, C.B.E. Deputy Clerk ofthe House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the BeefIndustry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition ofShares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tarilf Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tarilf (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 115

Wednesday, 25 February 1981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Tral'elling Post Office Senice
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the Australian Postal Commission's decision to phase out the Travelling Post Office (T.P.O.) inN.S.W.
The T.P.O. service has given the country people of N.S.W. a reliable and efficient service for many years. To replace this service with a road system would be a backward step which we believe would result in long delays in mail going to and from country centres.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition to retain the T.P.O. service in N.S.W.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage and Mr Dean.
Petitions received.
Sale of Publicly Owned Enterprises
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
There is a definite limit to the quantity of Australia's mineral resources.
Accordingly our resources should be managed and developed under Australian ownership and control.
Publicly owned trading enterprises and corporations have been established and operated for the benefit of Australians since Federation.
The Commonwealth Banking Corporation, Trans Australia Airlines, Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, Australian Wheat Board, were all designed to operate to the benefit of our Nation as a whole under public ownership.
The Fraser government's irresponsible proposals to sell off our Nation's interest in the Ranger Uranium Mine, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, and to dispose of other successful statutory corporations such as Trans Australia Airlines, would be contrary to the Nation's interests.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright proposals of the Fraser government to sell the Ranger Uranium Mine, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation and Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDean.
Petition received.

Sale of Publicly Owned Enterprises
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
There is a limit to the capacity of Australia's drug manufacturing industry in Australian hands.
Accordingly our resources should be managed and developed under Australian ownership and control.
Publicly owned trading enterprises and corporations have been established and operated for the benefit of Australians since Federation.
The Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, Commonwealth Banking Corporation, Trans Australia Airlines, Qantas, Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, Australian Wheat Board, were all designed to operate to the benefit of our Nation as a whole under public ownership.
The Fraser government's irresponsible proposals to sell off our Nation's interest in the Ranger Uranium Mine, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, and to dispose of other successful statutory corporations such as Trans Australia Airlines and the Fawnmac group of drug companies would be contrary to the Nation's interests. Fawnmac still makes a profit of about half the proposed sale price in a year and cost the Australian government several times the proposed sale price. It provides the Pharmaceutical Benefits pricing negotiators within the Health Department with inside information on drug manufacturing costs and so prevents collusive monopolistic pricing by major transnational drug firms. It complements the resources of the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories to make both Government owned drug firms more efficient and competitive by co-operation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright proposals of the Fraser government to sell the Ranger Uranium Mine, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, Trans Australia Airlines and the Fawnmac group of companies.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Aid to Ethiopia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we request a review of the Australian food aid to Ethiopia for the following reasons:
(a) Ethiopian involvement in four war fronts resulting in massive exodus of refugees out of the country-from supposed famine affected areas.
(b) Well documented atrocities committed by the Ethiopian Government against its own people and the people of neighbour1ng countries.
(c) Clear evidence of such aid being diverted for military purposes, away from the areas of greatest need.
That we request that the Australian Government provide aid to victims of the Ethiopian disaster in Somalia, Djibouti and the Sudan, through their Governments and through the Eritrean Relief Association in Eritrea.
That we request that the Australian Government sends economic aid as well as food aid to allow the indigenous governments of Somalia, Djibouti and the Sudan to implement relief work, i.e. transportation, health infrastructure etc.

116 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Petitions

That we object to Australia giving aid to Ethiopia and the Sudan, whilst failing to give substantial aid to the refugee victims of the war.
That Australia's involvement appears, to us, to be purely political-influenced by Australia's alliance with the United States-and consequently, we request that Australia restricts this aid to the war victims in Eritrea and those refugees in Somalia, Djibouti and the Sudan and that such aid exist on a substantial level.
That we object to the present Australian Government involvement in Ethiopia as lin-Christian and a violation of humane law.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield. Petition received.

Foreign Bases in Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned, believe it is the duty of our government to promote peace.
We believe the greatest threat to peace lies in the division of the world into two blocs grouped around the United States and the Soviet Union. These two blocs are locked into an escalating arms race. Unless this can be haltet:!, it will inevitably destroy people of both sides. We therefore call upon our politicians to work towards:
a non-aligned foreign policy non-nuclear Indian and Pacific Oceans the nuclear disarmament of the two major power blocs the development of exchanges of people, information and ideas between the two blocks;
and to oppose:
the creation of foreign bases over which the Australian Government will have no. control
the use of military facilities on Australian soil for nuclear armed planes and submarines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield.
Petition received.
Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should-
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presiding judge.
An~ your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDeao.
Petition received.

Arbitration Determination 503 of 1980

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

.

1. That the Government's move in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 which was granted by the full bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has (a) placed in jeopardy the future viability of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, (b) and has created a dangerous precedent fqr trade unions in general, by refusing to accept the umpire's decision.
2. That the Government has acted in complicity with the Public Service Board in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 and is thereby attempting to deny Government employees a fair hearing on matters related to redundancy and retrenchment.
Your petitioners therefqre humbly pray that the House will (a) reject any moves to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 and to exclude arbitral jurisdiction over any aspect of redundancy redeployment, retrenchment and retirement. (b) repeal existing powers to disallow arbitration determinations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dean.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of the proposed Plant Breeders' Rights legislation. The reasons are as follows:
(I) We believe it will eventually lead to the restriction of sales of many varieties of seed.
(2) We believe it will cause the disappearance of many usefulplant varieties as evidenced by similar legislation in Europe.
(3) We believe that it will cause the Australian seed industry to become fqreign controlled.
(4) We believe that a full public debate has not taken place and should take place before any laws are passed on the patenting of a life form.
Your petitioners, therefqre, humbly request that Parliament take positive action as soon as possible to arrest the implementation of such legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Mr Kim Dae J uog
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the question of basic human rights in the Republic of Korea is a matter of widespread and increasing concern. Since the assassination of the late President Park Chung Hee and the accession to power of Lt. General Chun Du Hwan the situation, already serious, has deteriorated rapidly.
That the issue is not simply one of basic human rights. The Korean Peninsula is one of the most explosive areas in the world. The collapse of the last vestiges of democracy in the Republic of Korea, the emergence of a military-police regime of unparallelled brutality, has convinced many moderate Korean refqrmers that peaceful political change is no longer possible. Renewed civil conflict in Korea would bring with it the terrifying prospect of Great Power involvement. Great Power involvement could precipitate a nuclear holocaust.
That Australia has a direct interest in what happens in Korea. The Australian Government, as a matter of urgency,

Petitions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 117

should work positively towards a peaceful, long-term and just settlement of the problems of the Korean Peninsula by:
using its good offices in Seoul, Washington, Tokyo and other capitals to secure the release of the South Korean Opposition Leader, Mr Kim Dae Jung, and all other political prisoners, and withdrawal of charges against them;
urging the speedy restoration of democratic political process in the Republic;
continually reviewing the economic, political and strategic implications of Australia's extensive trade with the Republic of Korea;
suspending Australia's uranium contracts with the Republic of Korea. The character of Lt. General Chun Du Hwan's Government suggests that it might not, given the opportunity, abide by either the letter or the spirit of the Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty, to which Australia is signatory. It has been estimated that within the next five years South Korea could be in a position to construct 36 plutonium bombs annually from the waste products of its civilian nuclear reactors;
working positively, both independently and in cooperation with other powers, to bring about conditions conducive to a peaceful, negotiated re-unification of the two halves of the Peninsula;
And your petitioners asin duty bound.will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth: that the price of LPG in Victoria has risen by $80 per tonne since November 1978 as a result of Federal Government policy thereby causing hardship to country consumers using LPG for cooking, heating and hot water and to decentralized industries using LPG for industrial purposes.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
1. that the Federal Government should abolish its so called 'export parity' pricing policy for LPG consumed in Australia.
2. that the price of Bass Strait LPG sold on the Australian market should be related to the true cost of production plus a fair margin of profit for the producers;
3. that all LPG ex Bass Strait consumed on the Australian market should be free of excise levy;
4. that there should be no restriction on availability of LPG ex. Bass Strait to meet the requirements of the Australian market;
5. that the price of LPG ex oil refineries should be established by the PJT at parity with Bass Strait LPG consumed on the Australian market;
6. that pending the establishment of a fair price in accordance with Clause 2 above and to provide some immediate relief to country consumers:
(a) the existing excise on Bass Strait LPG consumed in Australia: be abolished forthwith, thus providing a reduction in price of $27.60 per tonne for propane,
(b) that the windfall profit that Esso/BHP is enjoying as a result of the increase in price of LPG from $110 to $147 per tonne be directed to Australian consumers rather than the Federal Treasury through excise, thus .providing an additional decrease in the present price of $37.00 per tonne.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.

Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Mineral Sand Products
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which .animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were SUbjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.

118 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Petitions

(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth objection to the Metric system and request the Government to restore the Imperial system.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Australian Heritage Tribunal
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned Australian citizens by this petition show that:
People and property are protected by law but the rights of native flora and fauna are almost unrecognised.
There is censorship of reports of publicly funded environmental investigations.
Government at the various levels and statutory bodies cause unwarranted destruction of our heritage and are mostly protected by law.
Your petitioners request that an Australian Heritage Tribunal be set up as a branch of the Australian Heritage Commission to conduct on-site hearings of threats to our natural heritage.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman. Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. there is lack of public information about the content and intention of the proposed legislation on Plant Variety Rights;
2. there is concern that the ethical and moral issues of granting private proprietorial rights over genetic resources have not been properly and publicly considered;
3. there is evidence to suggest that such legislation may lead to a reduction in the existing plant diversity;
4. there is reason to fear that farmers may be restricted in their activities due to the controls placed on the use and propagation of seed stocks;
5. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights legislation will lead to higher costs for the farmer, the consumer, the plant-breeder and the tax payer, and
6. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights Legislation will lead to a further increase in foreign control of Australian resources.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament defer introducing the legislation until full and informed public discussion of the issues involved has taken place.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Aboriginals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth the demands of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island people for justice in this land which is rightfully theirs. We demand Land Rigths now, on these principles:
I. Immediate ownership rights by Tribal Groups, of land they continue to occupy.
2. That all existing lands designated as Aboriginal reserves be handed over to the respective Aboriginal groups, and that the land be effectively controlled and owned by the Aboriginals in that area under their law and customs.
3. That Aboriginal lands include total rights to all natural resources, and that present mining and prospecting be suspended until negotiations are held with Aboriginals.
4. That land ownership and control be legally protected and regarded as inviolable.
5. That Aboriginal people be compensated for the loss of all Aboriginal designated reserves, Tribal lands, and other lands revoked by the Commonwealth and State Governments.
6. That before compensation is decided negotiations be held to acquire those lands plus any other lands deemed necessary by the respective Aboriginal groups and tribes for their survival and benefits.
7. That any 'Crown Lands' which are of traditional or sacred significance to Aboriginals be ceded to them in perpetuity.
8. That all sites of anthropological or traditional significance to Aboriginals other than those on reserves or crown land be opened to the use of Aboriginals without fees or constraints.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Queensland Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Acts and their regulations and by-laws be abolished forthwith, and that Land Rights be established, believing that only when these two demands are fulfilled will Aboriginals and Torres Strait Island people begin to have their freedom and independence.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris. Petition received.
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 5 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in: (i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia; (ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 119

by Mr Morris. Petition received.

Airline Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:

That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.

That this policy has resulted in expensive airfareS and poor

service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visit-

ing WA and vice versa.

.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government wiIl look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Beazley, Mr McLean, Mr Shack and Mr Tuckey.

Petitions received.

Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ofthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscibers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFree.
Petition received.

Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Prospect respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.

Epidermolysis Bullosa Research
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Australia and their supporters respectfully showeth that funds for medical research into epidermolysis bullosa are no longer being made available from the Federal Government to the medical research team at the University of

New South Wales, enabling them to continue medical research into epidermolysis bullosa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that these signatures contained on these forms will serve to make it known that we expect these funds to be forthcoming in the very near future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY
Mr HURFORD-My question is addressed to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. Is it a fact that the latest Industries Assistance Commission motor vehicle industry recommendations will lead, on the lAC's own admission, to plants closing and thousands of jobs being lost? Is it a fact that the lAC has followed the Government's own rhetoric in pursuing a so-called market-free enterprise approach which will devastate certain regions of this country? Will the Government immediately heed the warnings of State governments, employers and unions, as well as the Labor Opposition, reject the report and its market only approach and swiftly end the uncertainty and insecurity by announcing a plan which will stimulate the motor vehicle manufacturing industry at the same time as leading to better value for consumers?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I can certainly understand the concern of the honourable member over the implications for employment in the automotive industry if the Industries Assistance Commission's draft recommendations were to be embodied in its final report and accepted by the Government. The honourable gentleman has referred to the lAC's assessment, subject to certain qualifications, of the significant loss of employment opportunities which the adoption of that report, in fact, would create. I think it is fair to say that this is one of the largest engineering concerns in the country which underpins very significantly much of Australia's engineering capability, its skills and technology, and provides-as the House would be very much aware-thousands of employment opportunities, particularly in Victoria, New South Wales and also South Australia.
The Government's recognition of the importance of the industry and its desire that there should be greater competitiveness within the industry and also that necessary changes in the industry should take place at a rate which would avoid undue disruption were clearly stated in the terms of reference which were given by the

120 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Questions Without Notice

Government to the lAC. The Government, in making its decision, of course, will need to reach a judgment which takes fully into account the competing and competitive representations by the vehicle manufacturers, the component producers, the importers and the service and dealership sector, as well as the consumers, and to pay significant regard to the employment implications of the recommendations. But I am sure the honourable gentleman would understand that this is not the time for the responsible Minister to respond to the views put by any honourable member of this House or indeed by any of the parties concerned.
Neither I, nor any other Government Minister, intends to be drawn into any debate at this time because, after all, the. report is a draft interim report which is designed to provide an' early exposure of the recommendations of the lAC 'and, in the process .which has been long established, to enable the respective parties to respond to those recommendations at a public hearing before the final recommendations come to the Government. I think the honourable gentleman would agree with me, given the normal lAC process, that it is an important part of decision making in areas of Government assistance to particular. industties that the'public inquiry process be "properly followed and enabled-to operate. Beyond that the Government's decision will be handed down after the final recommendations are beforeit and after the views of all the parties concerned, which I mentioned in the course of this answer, have been received.
DIS,ALLOWED 'QUESTION
Mr Cadman proceeding to address a question to the Minister!orTransport-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is suggesting the answer and is argumentative and, therefore, is out of order.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENARY
Mr COHEN-l preface my question to the Prime Minister by reminding him that I was appointed by the Leader .of the Opposition as a di~ rector of the Bicentennial Authority.' Now that the decisions have. been made not to proceed with either Expo 88 or the application for the 1988 Olympic Games in Melbourne-l do not intend to canvass either of those issues---'-will the .Prime Minister, in consultation w1th the Premiers, give consideration to introducing a States Grants (Bi~ centennial) Bill that wo~ld provide for funding on a $1 for $2 basis, or something similar, with State and local government, to enable the variQus regions and communities in Australia to start planning with the Bicentennial Authority speci~c

projects for 1988? I have in mind such projects as cultural centres, art galleries, sporting facilities, historic restorations, creation of parks and gardens, and the protection of Australian flora and fauna. Will the Prime Minister also determine a reasonable figure for Commonwealth commitment to ensure that such an act is not just tokenism? Does the Prime Minister realise the frustration of the 17 directors of the Authority and its officers and their fear that 1988 will finish up as a fireworks and marching girls only celebration rather than a unique opportunity, which most believe 1988 can become, to rediscover our heritage and plan our future?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-l.would certainly be at one with the. honourable gentleman, and I hope with all honourable members in this House, in wanting 1988 to be a truly. great year in the history of Australia and one in which all Australians, no matter what their origins, will feel they have been able to participate in a very. full sense. One of the problems in relation to both Expo 88, although I think the Premier and I had a common view of priorities on that, and the Olympic Games is: If we are to have a single project of such vast proportions and on out-turn prices costing many hundreds of milliohs of dollars, what then will we do for other capital cities and country towns?

.MrTohen-That is accepted. .

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-l know, and I am

glad the honourable gentleman accepts that. I

have already advised the Premiers that at the next

Premiers Conference I want to discuss the bicen-

tennial celebrations. I wal).t to see what commit-

ment they are. prepared to make and I want to

asses's their ideas about what ought to happen. I

will be having a discussion shortly with th~ Chair-

man of the Bicentennial Authority. The Auth-

ority put a lot of tiII?-e into th.e Expo proposal, and

I regret that, but "1 hop~ now that we can all get

down to planning events andcirculUstances which

will involve the whole nation-capital. cities,

country towns and the remote areas-in,the 1988

celebrations. I can think-of many different ways in

which people can become involved-through

sport, through culture, through a whole range of

activities-and I have no doubt that many things

will be planned. I would prefer to get theviews of

the States and of th.e. Authority which ha~ been

chl;lrged with these responsibilities before express-

ing aI1Y personal view abo~t how we might go

about it.

.

lVIr Conen-We llre doing an excellent job, I might.add.

Questions Without Notice

,.,' 25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 121

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am sure the Authority is, and I thank the honourable gentleman for his contribution. It was not a Dorothy Dix question. One thing that I think every level of government should be prepared to do is to give the bicentenary a place within its own order of priorities, and I include in ,that local government, State governments and the Commonwealth Government. It is not good enough just to say that we can have a 1988 celebration but that the Commonwealth has to find all the money over and above that provided by other levels of government. One of the things all levels of government will have to do is see where they will fit that year within their own priorities and make room for it in a meaningful way. I think I have a common objective with the honourable gentleman, but we want to take the process' a bit further before making any firm proposals.

OLYMPIC GAMES
Mr' FALCONER-My question to the Prime Minister concerns the announcement that the Commonwealth Government will not support-the Victorian Government's bid to stage the 1988 Olympic Games in Melbourne. What were the factors that were instrumental in the Commonwealth Government's decision? In particular, what would have been the likely cost of any Commonwealth involvement?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Some months

ago, as a result of discussions with the Victorilln

Government, we indicated that we would be pre-

pared to go forward with Victoria on a 50-50 basis

if the matter were to proceed, and a working party

of officials had'to work out the costs in greater de-

tail. It was hoped that that would enable us to

come to a judgment on the matter, and we have

done so. Most of the figures that have been given

in the media and most of the figures that have

corne out of Victoria have been based on 1980

prices, which of course makes everyone think that

the whole project would cost very much less than

it would in fact cost. The officials' report

indicated that, allowing for a 30 per cent cost

over~rU:n-a 30 per cent delay factor, if you

like-in all the construction projects, the out-turn

price, the dollars actually' spent, would be

$1,750m.

.

It is worth noting that for the Expo project in Sydney, on which in the end the New South Wales Government and the Commonwealth shared a common view .on' priorities and what should be done, the New South Wales Treasury worked on a 50 per cent cost over-run, if my recollection is right. The Victorian Olympic Games figure was worked on a 30 per cent cost over-run. When one

takes into account the. fact that major public works, major building stn,JCtures, in Victoria are experien,cing an 80 to' 85 per'cent delay factor-in other words, about 15 to 20 of every 100 days are worked, but generally not more than that-it makes one think that a 30 percent cost oVer-run for the Olympic Games proposal was very modest indeed. The figure could pe significantly more than that llnless there was a revolution in attitudes to construction projects, which of' course the Government is working ~o try to bring about at the moment. To take that into account would be to anticipate results that we have not yet fully achieved. The total cost would be $1,750m.'
Apart from interest charges it was plain that Victoria wanted to fund its share virtually solely . through the Loan Council as a net addition to its total borrowings through the Loan Council. Obviously there are some. implications in that. It is all. very well to say at the end of the day that the estimates are that the loss will be only $125m or $200m in1980. prices, but governments would have to find the money in the meantime because the returns that come in from the Olympic Games for the city that mounts them come in over the last year or 18 months before they are held. In the meantime the i;noney has to be found or raised. Very substantialadditional borrowing would, be required t~roughthe Loan Council. ,
The Chairman of the Loan Council approached the members of the Council in the course of last week for the purpose of assessing what p'riority, if any, the States were prepared to accord borrowings for the Olympic Games, especially so since certain Premiers had corne out publicly in support of Victoria'sapplicatiort. In the event, it was very plain that no State, including Victoria, was prepared to give the Olympic Garnes any priority whatsoever over other programs. In other words, it would go to the bottom of the list of require- . ments. The funds to be raised were to be totally and absolutely in' addition to all other requirements. An example of the kind of question asked is whether the holding ofthe Games in Melbourne would mean that the Loan Council- .could encompass in a responsible way lliarger overall borrowing program than it would have if the Games were not held in Melbourne:
Mr Barry Jones-It did it for the World Trade Centre without much hesitation. '
.Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is a slight difference between the funds for the World Trade Centre and $1,750m. It is very plain that no Premier was prepared to give priority to the Olympic Games in the borrowing program of the Loan

122 REPRESENTATIVES 2S February 1981

Questions Without Notice

Council. It was also very plain that the Commonwealth would be faced with the argument that we have to raise the maximum for all other programs and then raise money for the Olympic Games over and above the other programs. Some Premiers were prepared to say that the Games were important but would give funds for the Games absolutely no priority over funds for building roads, houses or whatever. There are funds for those purposes in the programs of the States, but the Olympic Games would not be given any priority at all. Against that background, the Commonwealth could only come to the view that it would have been irresponsible to commit itself to the support of the Games. After all, if the Loan Council were to allow Victoria to find its share through the medium of the Loan Council, it would have been good enough for the Commonwealth to find its share through the Loan Council instead of through the taxpayers of Australia. If we iooked at it from that point of view the additional requirements through the Loan Council would be about $1,700m. That puts the whole business into perspective. If the Premiers had been prepared to give the staging of the Olympic Games priority it might have been another matter; but they were not. If honourable gentlemen in the Australian Labor Party want to support raising that sum for the Olympic Games and the $1,200m for Expo they will only confirm the attitude that the Australian public has of them, that is, that they are a group of utter spendthrifts.
NURSING HOMES
Dr CASS-I ask the Minister for Health: As the audit of nursing homes in South Australia has uncovered incorrect claims to the extent of $1.9m, and as South Australia has a little under 10 per cent of the nursing home beds in Australia, is it a reasonable expectation that this latest health bungle has cost nationally approximately $20m?
Mr MacKELLAR-It is a fact that the almost completed audit in South Australia has uncovered an amount of about $1.9in. Ongoing audits are taking place in other States. Some of them are nearing completion. It is not correct to extrapolate the South Australian situation throughout the Australian continent. In fact, the situation varies very greatly from State to State. I am sorry to hear the honourable member say 'yet another health bungle'. It was the Department of Health which became aware of the problem. It has moved over some time to recover moneys incorrectly paid. The Department of Health relies upon the information given to it by proprietors of nursing homes and acts on that information in good faith. Rather

than this being a bungle, I think that the Department of Health is to be congratulated on its good administration in finding out about this problem and recovering the money incorrectly paid.
BEEF EXPORTS TO EUROPE
Mr O'KEEFE-Can the Minister for Trade and Resources give the House any information about progress or otherwise in his negotiations with the European Economic Community over Australia's beef exports to Europe?
Mr ANTHONY-As members of the House will be aware, part of the aim of the round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations was to come to an agreement with the EEC on matters including a global quota of 60,000 tonnes of beef. Unfortunately, the EEC had not honoured that settlement and, as a result, I went to Brussels last September to try to resolve the issue. I reached an agreement with the then Minister for Agriculture, Mr Gundelach, that he would put to the Council of Ministers a recommendation that that undertaking be honoured. Unfortunately, because of his death and other delays the matter was not looked at until this morning. I have unofficial word that the Council of Ministers agreed by a nine to one majority that the package of commodities submitted to it, which included the beef quota, was acceptable.
It is interesting to note that the one country that voted against the package of commodities was Italy, and it voted not against the beef issue but against a matter relating to sugar within the EEC. The situation is most encouraging. It looks as though this matter is now able to be settled. I hope that trade relations between Australia and the EEC can get back to a more amicable basis.
NURSING HOMES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Dr BLEWETT-I direct a question to the Minister for Health. Is it a fact that the Government intends to commence in March 1981 recoupment procedures against certain nursing homes in South Australia to recover sums mistakenly paid in nursing home benefits for insured patients? Is it also a fact that to date the private health funds have refused to reimburse the nursing homes for these insured patients? Will the Minister assure the House that no Government recoupment actions against the nursing homes will take pla('e until the private funds have met their obligations?
Mr MacKELLAR-As I mentioned in response to an earlier question from the Opposition, the Government and the Department of Health have become aware of payments incorrectly

Questions Without Notice

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 123

made. Those payments were made on the advice of nursing home proprietors. It is up to the nursing home proprietors to provide the correct advice to the Government. When that audit has been completed, recovery action, which, as the honourable member suggests, is due to commence in March of this year, will proceed. The response that registered health insurance organisationsmake to claims made upon them by nursing home proprietors is, of course, a matter for them, but I am confident that they will accept their obligations, which are clearly outstanding. I have no reason to believe that they will not accept those obligations. The Government is very concerned to ensure that no nursing home is badly affected because of this matter. It is consulting individual proprietors to make certain that the recovery procedures will be such as not to disadvantage seriously individual nursing homes; but the recovery procedures will go ahead.
MURRAY RIVER
Mr GILES-I address my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Has the Commonwealth recently held discussions with State Ministers responsible for water resources within the Murray basin? Can the Minister report whether progress was made towards agreement on providing to the River Murray Commission further powers governing water quality? Is there a problem concerning industrial pollution criteria and is this the only, or major, factor holding up final agreement?
Mr ANTHONY-The honourable member, rightly, has been very concerned about the water quality and salinity of the Murray River. The Commonwealth also has been concerned. As a result of the Maunsell report, it provided last year $6m to each of the States concerned, on a dollar for dollar basis, to see that work was undertaken in an effort to improve water quality in the Murray River. The Government has also amended the income tax laws to .permit tax deductions to be made for expenditures upon drainage and salinity control measures. Those have been major areas of assistance.
The Government now seeks to amend the legislation governing the River Murray Commission so that the Commission can take account of water quality. The Minister for National Development and Energy called a meeting on the subject on 12 February at which very good progress was made. For the first time all of the States recognised that co-operation was needed and that the Commission should be given extra powers to try to do something about the problem. The Commonwealth does not wish to intrude upon, or interfere

with, the rights of the States, as far as the tributaries are concerned-that is a matter for thembut it does want co-operation. At that meeting, the representatives of the States all agreed to take certain recommendations back to their governments and I hope that in the very near future the relevant legislation can be amended.
PUBLIC HOSPITAL FUNDING
Mr MILTON-Will the Minister for Health take immediate action, in co-operation with the State governments, to provide funds to meet the $60m shortfall in hospital funding to ensure that wards are not closed and that public facilities are not denied to patients?
Mr MacKELLAR-As the honourable member would be aware, the Commonwealth Government has entered into a fifty-fifty cost sharing arrangement with the States in relation to public hospital funding. The arrangement was arrived at in consultation with the States and over the last three years sufficient money has been made available to keep in existence all of the facilities that were originally in place. In other words, sufficient money has been made available to maintain the services. It is, of course, up to individual boards of hospitals and State administrations to ensure that individual hospitals adhere to their budgets. That is not the Commonwealth's responsibility. The amounts were arrived at in consultation with the States and I can see no further action required by the Commonwealth in relation to the budgets of individual hospitals. I repeat that it is a matter for State administrations in consultation with the individual hospitals within their responsibility.
AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD PAYMENTS
Mr IAN CAMERON-Does the Minister for Primary Industry recall that last October the Australian Wheat Board made payments available from the 1977-78 and 1978-79 pools to assist growers in drought affected areas and at the same time undertook to continue studies to ensure that further disbursements would be proposed in the first half of 1981? Can the Minister inform the House whether the Board has considered making further cash distributions available?
Mr NIXON-As suggested by the honourable member, the Australian Wheat Board did make those payments. The payments came as a result of a meeting I attended with the honourable member last August at a place called Talwood in his electorate. At the same time I took up with the Wheat Board the question of possible future payments. The honourable member and other honourable

124 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Questions Without Notice

members who have made representations to me, less than 36.7 per cent above the level of the Sep-

particularly on behalf of urought stricken tember quarter of 1979. Furthermore, the invest-

farmers, will be pleased to know that the Wheat ment in prospect of the private sector in capital

Board is meeting tomorrow to finalise a deexpenditure for the December quarter shows a

termination and a report to me on the prospects of continuation of the same strong growth. These

a further payment.

figures are the latest in a long line of statistics

which indicate with increasing strength the pace

ALL ORDINARIES INDEX
Mrs CHILD-My question is addressed to the Prime Minister. I remind him of the statements he made during the week before the last Federal election when share prices fell and the Australian all ordinaries index dropped to 661.4 points. At the time, the Prime Minister blamed the fall on the prospect of a Labor government. How does he explain the fact that for 15 of the past 18 trading days the all ordinaries index has been well below the level of 661.4 points and has been as low as 641 points? Is this the result of his Government's disastrous economic policies?

and momentum of the economic recovery which is taking place in Australia at present and demonstrate the contribution which is being made to economic growth via the private sector. They underline the continuing need to restrain the growth of the public sector to make room for that private sector development. They also remind us how wrong were some statements made after the last Budget. I am reminded of a statement made on an Australian Broadcasting Commission radio station on 19 August last year when this was said:
Retail sales are flat, production's been pretty disastrous, motor car sales have been dreadful, unemployment is starting to climb again and inflation's taking off. I would argue that it

will be in excess of 12 per cent by the end of the year.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thought it was the judgment of everyone at the time that that fall was as a result of the prospect of a'Labor govern-
ment. The honourable member will know quite well that at that time one of those thoroughly
helpful gallup polls was published which gave a result which proved to be totally false. Some people seemed to believe it, although I did not. What happened then was very much as a result of
that. If one wants to follow movements in the share market at any time one has to follow through a whole range of national and inter-

The author of that piece of economic perspicacity was the Leader of the Opposition. We all know what level inflation reached by the end of the year. He was not to be left alone. He was joined by the honourable member for Gellibrand, who is the alternative Treasurer of this country. On 21 September last year-:-in the middle of the quarter to which I have just referred, the quarter he was talking about-he said:
Considerable doubt is cast over Government claims that business investment is likely to expand rapidly this year . . .

national circumstances to be able to make a proper judgment. It is only very seldom that one has such a clear cause and effect as occurred in that one week before the last election.

He said this in the middle of a 'quarter which produced a 36.7 per cent increase in the volume of fixed capital investment in the Australian community. Not content with that, four days later he

PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT

said:
Figures released today confirm basic weaknesses in the Aus-

Mr BAUME-My question is addressed to the tralian economy and show that production has stagnated durTreasurer. Recognising the benefits to the econing the last twelve months.

omy in general and employment in particular The statistics on fixed capital investment demon-

emerging from a healthy level of investment, can strate the contribution to economic recovery of

he give any indication of trends in investment the private sector. They also demonstrate the wis-

expenditure in Australia by private enterprise, . dom of this Government in saying that restraint of

particularly in view of the gloomy predictions of public sector expenditure was needed to make

the Opposition late last year? What implications room for private sector expenditure. It will re-

would a strong growth in private sector investmain the policy of this Government to restrain

ment have for future levels of the Budget deficit? and reduce the size of the public sector because by

so doing it will facilitate economic recovery from

Mr HOWARD-As it happens, in the past few the private sector, which is the only sound basis of

days some statistics have been released which I economic recovery in this country.

think bear emphasis in this House, particularly as all honourable members on this side of the House

BLOOD LEAD LEVELS

are concerned about a healthy level of private secMr SCOTT-Has the attention of the Minister

tor-investwent. The figures for the September for Education been drawn to the report of the

quarter of 1980 indicate that expenditure was no Thebarton Council-in the Federal electorate of

Questions Without Notice

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 125

Hindmarsh dealing with blood lead levels of school children in the area? Is he aware that the level of lead in the air at the Thebarton Primary School was almost three times the safety level recommended by the National Health and Medical Research Council? Is the Minister also aware of the call from the Thebarton Council to have the Thebarton Primary School resited? Will he give urgent consideration to making the necessary funds available to enable the school to be relocated away from a busy traffic intersection and the flight paths of Adelaide Airport? These lead levels are some of the highest in the world.
Mr FIFE-My attention has not been drawn to the report niferred to by the honourable member. However, I would draw his attention to the fact that the matters he raised are in the first instance the responsibility of the State authorities. I realise that towards the end of his question he asked whether certain funds could be made available by the Federal Government to allow this school to be relocated. For the information of both the honourable member and the House, I indicate that the Commonwealth contributes to the cost of maintaining government schools, both on the recurrent and on the capital side. Those Sums are made available on an annual basis. They are made available on a block grant basis. It is a matter for the State governments to determine the priority in relation to the expenditure of that money.
BUSHFIRE AT ZEEHAN
Mr GROOM-I direct a question to the Prime Minister. It is now just over three weeks since the disastrous bushfire swept through Zeehan in Tasmania destroying some 40 homes and the possessions of 40 families living in that area. With winter fast approaching, those families are anxious to know where they stand so far as financial help from the Government is concerned. Is the Prime Minister able to inform the House of the precise nature of financial help to be provided to homeless families in Zeehan?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Commonwealth is still awaiting substantive proposals from the Premier of Tasmania in relation to rehousing the people of Zeehan who lost their homes in a most tragic fire. I am advised that the Premier has formed a committee of officials to examine this particular matter. I have suggested to the Premier that there is a need for the citizens concerned to be represented on that committee. I have also suggested that a State member of Parliament should be represented on it and that, because of our concern with national disasters and national disaster relief, the Federal Parliament also ought to be represented. The honourable member for

Braddon is the person who I have suggested should be the representative of the Federal Parliament. I hope that, if the Premier is prepared to accept that proposal, decisions will be made as speedily as possible in relation to rehousing these people. I know that in the early days a proposal was made to group in a different suburb in one particular locality all those who were burnt out. I was concerned at that time that decisions made immediately in the aftermath of the fire might catch people on the rebound and they might make decisions that they would not want to stay with in the longer term. That time has now passed. I hope that decisions can be made quickly and that proposals can be put to us.
Meanwhile, of course, in accordance with the national disaster arrangements the Federal Government contributes on a $1 for $1 basis with the State towards the provision of any emergency assistance and accommodation that the people concerned need. In addition, a major public facility in Zeehan which has been used by many groups in the community was burnt. I refer to the scout hall. We have agreed, irrespective of the normal financial arrangements, to provide $3 for every $1 to assist in the rebuilding of that hall. There is no reason why that should not proceed as quickly as possible and as quickly as people can get the matter moving. I hope that that proposal will be taken as evidence of the Commonwealth's concern in this particular matter. The Government is awaiting firm and positive proposals from Mr Lowe. As soon as such proposals are in my hands, they will be processed as speedily and as sympathetically as is possible. I hope that the Premier will pick up the suggestion that I have made and place the honourable member for Braddon on that committee so that any delays may be minimised.

PERSONAL INCOME TAX
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister whether he recalls stating with conviction in his 1975 policy speech:

We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years . . . It will make-government more honest with your money.

As full indexation has never been provided in

spite of the opportunities presented by five

Budgets, and in view of his statement on Monday

morning that the Government does not intend to

go beyond half tax indexation, which allowing for

discounting is much less than that, can we con-

clude from his 1975 statement of principle that at

best the Government is now prepared to be only

much less than half honest with the public's

money?

.

.

126 REPRESENTATIVES 2S February 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman was probably busy and probably did not read the 1980 policy speech. I suggest that he do so because it had something to say on the subject of indexation. If he has listened to the remarks that I have made and the Treasurer has made in recent times he will also understand that it has been difficult for the people of Australia to understand the benefits of indexation in terms of a policy of tax reductions. Therefore, for a government that is concerned about reducing taxes, there is a very real question as to whether the policy of tax indexation should be maintained as such or whether a government should reduce taxes as and when it can in terms of the best interests of the taxpayers of Australia.
In addition, let me provide a further argument. A policy of tax indexation tends to freeze the tax structure in one particular pattern. If taxes are reduced as and when possible through the budgetary processes, there is a greater opportunity to make certain adjustments to relieve the hardship on people on lower incomes within the total tax framework than if there is a rigid policy of tax indexation. That, again, indicates that in the tax area there are legitimate arguments on both sides of the question. But in relation to tax indexation, I suggest that the honourable gentleman read the 1980 policy speech.
ROAD EXPENDITURE
Mr COWAN-I address my question to the Minister for Transport. Is it a fact that last year the Minister announced a five-year agreement with the States in respect of road expenditure? Do the amounts provided yearly increase over the five-year period? If so, can the Minister explain whether, in the actual determination of the amounts, consideration was given to the inflationary trend?
Mr HUNT-Last year the Government announced that it would be making an allocation of $3,6S0m available to the States and to local government--
Mr Lusher-How much was that?
Mr HUNT-To assist them in their road programs over the next five years. I repeat that $3,6S0m is being made available over the five-year period. That amount took into account an inflation expectation of 1l.14 per cent in this financial year, 9 per cent in the next financial year, 7 per cent in the following financial year and 6 per cent in the next two successive years. These figures were calculated by the Treasury and by the Department of Finance taking into account the responsible economic policies that the Fraser

Government is pursuing. To have allowed for a greater expansion over those years would have been nothing short of being irresponsible.
We expect the State road making authorities and local government authorities to make the most of the productivity that has been achieved in earth movement and road construction. Naturally, if they improve their efficiencies in road construction, they would expect to more than meet those anticipated inflationary levels. I might say that the States have not yet committed themselves to the levels of finance that they are prepared to make available over the five-year period. But the Commonwealth has; it has made a very sizable contribution to the road needs of this country.
TACTICAL FIGIITER FORCE
Mr SCHOLES-When does the Minister for Defence anticipate that he will be able to make an announcement on the final choice of an aircraft for the tactical fighter force to replace the Mirage aircraft?
Mr Sinclair-I would not have thought the Opposition would feel the need for a TFF while Mr Killen is firing so well.
Mr SCHOLES-That may be so, but the Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence do not agree with the right honourable member. Has the Government reopened the short list of two aircraft and are other aircraft now under consideration? Can the Minister give an assurance to the House that the program of 7S aircraft is now still within the financial capacity of the announced or projected funds for the five-year program, taking into consideration the estimated cost of the aircraft carrier project with its accompanying helicopters and aircraft?
Mr KILLEN-I appreciate my honourable friend's interest. I have but little to add to the statement I made to the House before the Parliament rose for the Christmas recess. Yes, it is the Government's intention to seek to determine this matter around about June of this year. With respect to the question of whether the Government has widened the short list, the answer is no. At the moment two contenders are on the list, namely, the Fl6 and the FA18 aircraft. No other aircraft is under consideration. I am not aware of any information relating to the financial proposals. I certainly am not in possession of any information which would lead me to support an argument to disturb the proposed financing of the purchase of the aircraft and helicopter carrier to which the honourable gentleman refers.

General

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 127

MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
Mr CONNOLLY-In view of the growing strength of the Australian economy can the Treasurer advise the House whether the Government will be encouraging large multinational companies operating in Australia to follow the example of Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd which recently announced its intention to seek local participation in its Australian operations? Will the Government, through the Foreign Investment Review Board, expect all such companies wishing to Australianise to do so in accordance with investment guidelines? Will the Government favour the spread of equity participation among the Australian community?
Mr HOWARD-I thank the honourable member for Bradfield for his question. I make it clear at the outset that, generally speaking, the Government takes the view that investment and commercial decisions as to how companies are operated and how they are structured-providing they comply with the law-are matters for the individual jUdgment of people who' run those companies. I have noted, as I am sure have all honourable members, the announcement made by Caltex Oil (Aust.) Pty Ltd regarding a proposed acquisition of an interest in H. C. Sleigh Ltd. Of course, that proposal will need to be examined by the Foreign Investment Review Board. I think I would be interpreting the views of honourable members on this side of the House and, indeed, of a large number of honourable members, in saying that the Government welcomes the indication by that company that share issues are to be made available to the Australian public. It would represent the first occasion on which a multinational oil company would make equity available to Australian investors. That is a trend which the Government welcomes and I wish to make that point quite clear without in any way implying that the rules of the game will be changed to make it necessary for people to do that. Nonetheless, it is a development that the Government welcomes.
The Australianisation rules within the foreign investment policy which were brought in in 1978 have now been in operation for a considerable period. They are being utilised increasingly by companies and are further evidence of the determination of this Government to ensure that a fair share of the development of Australia's resources is received by individual Australians.
COMMONWEALTH ADMINISTRATION OF NURSING HOME PROGRAMS
Mr SPEAKER-I present the report of the Auditor-General on an efficiency audit of the

Commonwealth Administration of Nursing Home programs.
Motion (by Mr Sinc1air)-by leave-agreed to:
(1) That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report of the Auditor-General on an efficiency audit of the Commonwealth Administration of Nursing Home programs; and
(2) That the report be referred to the Standing C9mmittee on Expenditure for inquiry and report.
URBAN EXPANSION AND REDEVELOPMENT
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 8 of the Urban and Regional Deve10pment (Financial Assistance) Act 1974 I present an agreement in relation to the provision of financial assistance to New South Wales and Victoria for urban expansion and redevelopment, Albury-Wodonga, 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN MEAT AND LIVESTOCK CORPORATION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 29 of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation Act 1977 I present the annual report of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation 1979-80.
AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 54 of the Wheat Marketing Act 1979 I present the annual report of the Australian Wheat Board for the year ended 30 September 1979. I informed the House on 19 September and 4 December 1980 of the program of ongoing action being undertaken by the Board to correct deficiencies in its financial and accounting management procedures and systems. The Government is continuing to monitor the Board's implementation of that program through the arrangements to which I referred in my statement of 4 December 1980.
AUSTRALIAN EGG BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 23 of the Egg Export Control Act 1947 I present the annual report of the Australian Egg Board 1979-80.
AUSTRALIAN HONEY BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 30 (3) of the Honey Industry Act 1962 I present the annual report of the Australian Honey Board 1979-80.

128 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

General

TRADE UNION TRAINING AUTHORITY
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Pursuant to section 58 of the Trade Union Training Authority Act I present the annual report of the Trade Union Training Authority 1979-80.

GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK AUTHORITY
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 60 of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975 I present the annual report of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority 1979-80.

INQUIRY INTO DOMESTIC AIR FARES
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister. for Transport)-For the information 'of honourable members I present the report of the Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

That the House take note of the paper.

Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, in order to clarify this matter, you may recan that on a similar occasion before Christmas you indicated that you were reviewing the procedure for presentation of reports of this nature and that time would be allowed for debate immediately fonowing presen-
tation of the report. Is that now possibl.e.?
Mr SPEAKER-If that is the will of the House. The honourable member for Shortland should raise the matter with the Leader of the House and, if agreement were made between both sides of the House, then I would can that paper last of the papers to be presented. If there were to be debate on the paper it would have to take its place in the order of business behind ministerial statements. At this stage, the only thing that can be done is to adjourn the debate. The matter of time for a debate then can be taken up by the honourable member for Shortland with the Leader of the House.

Mr Morris-This is a most important matter. I ask the Leader of the House through you, Mr Speaker, that time be set aside before tomorrow evening for debate on the report.

Mr Sinclair-No assurance can or will be given.

Mr Morris-I just say that the Parliament is being treated as contemptuously as the committee was treated.

Questi",., ~~~-'

the affirmative.

COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE EFFICIENCY AND ADMINISTRATION
OF HOSPITALS
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members I present a report, Volumes 1 to 3, on the Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, December 1980. Copies of the report were distributed to honourable members during the summer recess.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Imove:
That the House take note of the papers.
In explanation, could I say that if the Opposition wishes to debate these papers the Manager of Opposition Business can canvass the matter with me and reasonable opportunities for debate will be provided. However, the matter has to be taken into account in relation to the overan management of the business of the House.
Mr Morris-By tomorrow night?
Mr SINCLAIR-No, I said 'not by tomorrow night'.
Mr SPEAKER-The question relates to the paper tabled by the Minister for Health, that is, a report on the Commission of Inquiry into Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, Volumes 1 to 3, to which the Leader of the House has moved that the House take note of the paper.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) -For the information of honourable members I present the Canberra Conege of Advanced Education report 1979.
INSURANCE COMMISSIONER
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to make a short comment about a document that was tabled last year.
Mr SPEAKER-I will give the indulgence and decide whether I will permit the Minister to continue.
Mr HOWARD-Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 18 September last year I presented to Parliament the annual report for 1979-80 of the Insurance Commissioner. It was subsequently drawn to my attention that the report as tabled contained an error in Appendix A, which classifies insurance organisations at 30 June 1980. I have arranged for an erratum slip to the report giving details of the necessary correction to be tabled in this House

Taxation

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 129

and in the Senate. Copies of the report mailed to tax objectives and the realisation that the Govern-

the insurance industry' and to the general public or ment came within a hair's breadth of losing the

sold through the Au,~fralian Government Publishlast general election. If 6,523 votes in the right

ing Service booksljpps were corrected before places had gone the other way-that is, only 0.08

distribution.

'

per cent of the total number of votes-the

Mr SPEAKER-I think that is a correct matter for indulgence, which has been granted.

Government parties would now be in opposition.
All Government members know that unless they can get their act together, particularly in the cru-

TAXATION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

cial area of taxation, they will not survive the next election.
There can be no doubting the enormity of the Government's failure in, the tax area. In that regard it must be recalled that this is a government which came to office proclaiming itself to be a low tax coalition, a coalition which would reduce taxes, reduce the size of the public sector and let

The failure and confusion of the Government's taxation people decide for themselves how their money

policy,

should be spent. It was, therefore, very much the

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

language that marks the new President of the United States of America, but Ronald Reagan would not draw any ,comfort from analysing the antipodean experiments. What we see now, after five years of supposedly low tax government, is a situation in which taxes are higher than ever, not

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.16)-Throughjust in money terms but in terms of the proportion out the last few months the people of Australia of the incomes of people that now go in tax.

have been treated to a remarkable spectacle. That In regard to income tax, the irrefutable fact is

spectacle has involved a government which has that under the tax schedules applying this finan-

been in office for five years and which has just cial year 80 per cent of taxpayers-that is, four

been elected for the third time thrashing about in out of every five taxpayers-are paying a higher

a public display of chaos, confusion and conflict proportion of their incomes in income tax than

regarding what it should do about taxes. We have' was the case when Labor was in office. Further-

been treated to such amazing scenes as the more, that 80 per cent come from the lower and

Government inquiring into exactly the same middle income groups: The lower the income the

issues it inquired into two years previously-that greater the rise in the tax burden. It is only the

is, a broad-based indirect tax-and reaching the higher income earners who have been awarded

same negative conclusion for the same reason as real tax ,cuts. Thus, the equity of the tax system

previously. We have had the Treasurer (Mr has been deliberately reduced by this Govern-

Howard) being rolled in Cabinet on that issue. ment. The Goverment's promises of tax cuts ring

While the inquiry was still going on we had the hollow to the great majority of the people who are

Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the paying more not less of their incomes in income

Treasurer closing off options which still were the tax.

subject of that inquiry. We have had the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), no less, declaring
his opposition to any of the options which were
being examined. We have had Cabinet members publicly at each other's throats on the tax issue.
We have had one of the coalition parties cam-
paigning on a tax policy completely contrary to government policy.

Despite that undeniable situation, the Govern-
ment persists with the language of tax cuts and low taxes as though none of that had happened.
We thus have an ever growing credibility gap be-
tween the reality of what is happening to people and the Government's portrayal of itself, so much
so that rather than speak of a credibility gap on
this issue it is more appropriate to speak of a

Under those circumstances the public is encredibility chasm. Even now, when it is patently

titled to wonder just what is going on, to wonder obvious to most Government members what has

whether this Government knows what it is about happened and when the Government is in dis-

or whether it has completely lost its sense of direcarray on this issue, we have witnessed the

tion. Of course, the answer 'is that the GovernGovernor-General in his opening address to this

ment has no idea where it is going. It is in a state of new Parliament being made to repeat the inanities

near panic because of its total failure to achieve its about taxpayers being given freedom of choice in

130 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Taxation

spending their incomes. Likewise, as recently as last night, we had the Treasurer extolling the virtues of his Government as a low tax government.

That is either self-delusion or, more likely, a desperate attempt to convince the public that the reality of increased taxes which they see reflected in their pay packets does not exist. Given the untenable nature of such an exercise by even the most gifted fiscal Houdini, the Treasurer is in danger of becoming an object of public derision. He deservedly should be known as the Minister for phantom tax cuts. He keeps telling us about tax cuts but when we attempt to find them they are not there. In fact, unless one is receiving quite a high income one is worse off now than before.

What makes that situation even more aggravat-

ing to the great majority of taxpayers is that, while

they are paying more tax, a relatively small but

growing group of high and especially very high in-

come earners is paying little or no tax. This has

come about because of the Government's com-

plete failure to prevent a continuing explosion in

tax avoidance, which has now reached the stage at

which, according to Professor Matthews of the

Australian National University, up to $3 billion a

year in potential tax revenue is being lost through

tax avoidance and evasion. There can be no refut-

ing the fact that tax avoidance is now far greater

than it was when this Government took office.

For last financial year, 1979-80, the Com-

missioner of Taxation reported that the number

of identified participants in tax avoidance

schemes was 20 times greater than was the case in

the last year of the Labor Government.

.

The Government's failure to prevent the proliferation of tax avoidance has resulted in its increasing the tax burden on the rest of the taxpayers, or most of them, in order to maintain revenue. That in turn has resulted not only in an increase in the tax burden of most taxpayers but also in a massive reduction in the equity and fairness of the tax system. The impact of tax avoidance in that regard is best illustrated by the fact that between 1975-76 and 1979-80 the incomes of all pay-as-you-earn taxpayers-that is, all wages and salaries paid-went up by 49 per cent but total income tax payments on those incomes went up by 73 per cent. However, for non pay-as-youearn taxpayers-that is, recipients of business, property and farm income-total incomes increased by 79 per cent but total income tax payments went up by only 31 per cent. Such inequity is quite indefensible.

A further factor compounding the Government's failure in regard to taxation and extending

its credibility chasm in that area is the extraordinary increase in the oil Jflx revenue. Between 1975-76 and 1980-81, the,ill>!:esent financial year, the oil tax revenue has g<;>,l}.5ifr.om $257m to a budgeted figure of $3,054m, ;~hich apparently will come out at more like $3,100m-an increase of over 1,100 per cent in that period of five years. As well as representing an extraordinary increase in taxation, this development has reduced the equity of the tax system as it is a patently regressive tax. The combined effect of all these factors has been to bring about an overall tax level which is substantially greater than that which applied when Labor was in office. For three years of Labor government, total Commonwealth tax receipts averaged 22.5 per cent of gross domestic product, whereas for the five years of the Fraser Government they have averaged 23.8 per cent. In the last year-that is, this year-they have reached a record 24.6 per cent. The overall tax burden therefore has undeniably increased under this Government. When one takes into account as well the much less equitable distribution of that burden so that most taxpayers are paying much more of their inc.omes in tax, this Government's t.otal lack .of credibility in regard t.o tax is fully exposed.

In these circumstances .of the Government's

abject failure t.o fulfil its original taxation objec-

tives, it is not surprising to find the Government in

t.otal disarray on this issue. Thus, we have the des-

perate search f.or pseud.o-soluti.ons, such as a new

br.oad-based indirect tax which the Treasurer has

twice put t.o Cabinet and each time has had

rejected on exactly the same grounds, that is, that

it W.ould be inflati.onary, which it certainly W.ould

be. It sh.ould be added, of c.ourse, that in any case

it would have been no real s.olution t.o the Govern-

ment's taxation dilemma as the .overall level .of

taxation W.ould have remained the same. The

advantage for the G.overnment, h.owever, would

have been that such a tax would have reduced the

visibility of tax. Inthe event, the G.overnment de-

cided that it could not aff.ord t.o pay f.or this piece

of deception.

.

An.other pseud.o-s.olution put forward was the flat rate tax. Although the Treasurer and the Prime Minister have t.otally opposed it, we have had vari.ous .other Government members publicly supporting it, such as the Deputy Prime Minister, wh.o, as recently as three days ago, reiterated his support f.or the c.oncept. Other members .of the Nati.onal C.ountry Party, such as the five members .of its self-styled Taxati.on c.ommittee of inquiry, about which we have heard little since its formati.on was ann.ounced, have als.o expressed their

Taxation'

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 131

support for this concept. So, too, did the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) and former Senator S'neil during the recent McPherson by-eledio'n. Senator-elect BjelkePetersen campaigned'inthe last general election on a platform of flat rate taxes and high rise scones. The absurdity of this proposal is demonstrated by the bewildering variety of forms in which it is proposed by its advocates and its gross inequity. As proposed by Mrs Bjelke-Petersen in the last election campaign, it would have involved losses of revenue of up to $9 billion or $10 billion, whilst in the form proposed by ex-Senator Sheil it would have involved much higher taxation for the majority of taxpayers. That is hardly a solution for them.
In a remarkable turnaround the scheme proposed by ex-Senator Sheil on behalf of the National Party in the recent by-election even involved taxation of capital gains, a proposal to which all coalition members, including the flat taxers, had expressed their total opposition only a few months before. More importantly, in whatever formit would involve a massive reduction in the equity of the tax system. It therefore remains a matter of concern to the Opposition that Cabinet members as highly placed as the Deputy Prime Minister are in open support of a flat rate of tax. In such circumstances and with the propensity of the Treasurer to be rolled in Cabinet on important tax issues, it is possible that a government desperate on the taxation issue could reach for such a crackpot pseudo solution at some future date.
'Further evidence of the Government's desperation on the tax issue is its reconstitution, after the last election, of the Cabinet committee to review government expenditure. The Treasurer made it clear only two days ago that with the demise of his broad-based indirect tax scheme he placed his hopes for reductions in income tax on this committee's activities. However, on the same day the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made it clear in a television interview that, as distinct from the Treasurer, he did not see much scope for tax reductions being created by this committee's activities. Doubtless, the Prime Minister was influenced by the fact that, despite the existence of such a Cabinet committee for several years, under his Cabinet expenditure in the public sector is greater by 2 per cent of gross domestic product than it was when the Labor Government was in office.
For all these reasons-the rising burden of income tax, the oil tax, rampant tax avoidance and a 'failure to reduce the public sector-the Fraser Government's credibility chasm continues to grow. Hence the disarray within the Government

at present as to what should be done about it. There is every reason to expect this disarray to continue. The open differences in Cabinet and the government parties as to what tax reforms should be implemented are not likely to be resolved in the near future, if at all. The prospect of a reduced burden of personal income tax is clearly more remote now that the Prime Minister has asserted that the Government is committed only to half tax indexation, thereby implying a continuing increase in the tax burden as taxpayers move up the tax scale with inflation. The Prime Minister's indication that significant tax cuts cannot be expected from the Lynch Committee's activities closes off another potential source of tax cuts. The Government's refusal to adopt a resource rent tax which would tax the super profits of mining companies also makes personal tax cuts less possible. It closes off a sensible alternative source of revenue.
Likewise, the Government's absolutely scandalous decision not to apply a crude oil levy to the Fortescue oil field in the Bass Strait on the ground that it is new oil closes off a very lucrative source of alternative revenue. This decision by the Government means that it has turned its back on $3.5 billion of tax revenue at current prices. That enormous sum is the net additional tax it would gain over and above what would otherwise be paid in company tax over the 10 years following the commencement of production from this field, which is scheduled to be mid-1982, if the crude oil levy were applied to this field. In other words, $3.5 billion extra could be gained by applying the Government's own tax policy in respect of other oil fields to Fortescue. The Government has refused to do so. In the process, $3.5 billion will be paid out to the shareholders of Esso-BHP and will not be available to be used for the benefit of the Australian people. This is an absolutely scandalous decision for which the Government should be condemned.
Clearly, if the tax burden on ordinary Australians is to be reduced, a determination. by government is required to ensure that areas of taxable capacity which are not now being adequately exploited are so exploited. This means that we must have, firstly, a resource rent tax. There is a crying need at the outset of a resources boom or increasing resource development for a' resource rent tax. There is no doubt that super profits will be made in a number of projects. They are already being made in Bass Strait and by the Utah company. They will be made in various other projects. It is scandalous that such projects are not to be taxed appropriately and that those super profits will flow to a relatively small group of Australians and to foreigners. It is also important that

132 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Taxation

Fortescue be brought in to that resource rent tax area which it would be by a Labor government.
We need a comprehensive attack on tax avoidance. We have not yet had it. I say in passingtime does not permit an elaboration-that section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act is not enough. Many of the other actions suggested by the Labor Party in its policy are required. The abolition of wasteful tax concessions such as the investment allowance is required. The investment allowance is doing little for investment. It is being paid to resources companies which will develop projects in this country with or without that concession. Finally, a faster rate of economic growth, which would come from the Labor Party's policies, would enable tax revenue to be increased without increasing tax rates.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.30)-1 welcome the discussion of this matter of public importance because it provides me with an opportunity to say something about the background to the Government's decision which I announced on Monday about possible moves towards a broad-based indirect tax. I also inform the House that I will be taking advantage of an opportunity in the very near future to make a more detailed statement to the Parliament about taxation matters. That will provide to the Opposition and to Government members interested in this very important subject 'the opportunity to engage in a full and detailed debate on aspects of taxation.
I do not suppose there is any economic matter on which it is more difficult to obtain a consensus in the Australian community than the question of taxation. None of, us likes paying taxes and everybody believes in general in the idea of. paying lower taxes although very few people are prepared to face the consequences in terms of reducing the size of government expenditure. That comment goes right across the spectrum because some of the strongest advocates of lower taxation in the community refuse to accept the very simple proposition that the only government that can effectively and responsibly reduce taxation is a government which is prepared to red\lce the size of its own operations. Any government or any group of people in government who believe it is possible to increase expenditure and reduce taxation at the same time do not understand the economic experience of the Western world in the last 20 or 30 years.

There are, in essence, two issues to be looked at

when one is looking at the overall taxation situation in Australia. Firstly;!~e have to look at the

overall munity.

lSeveeclonodflyta, xwaetiohljj.A~e,JtohelooAkuasttrathlieancocmobmi--

nation or mix of taxation"ihat provides the rev-

enue for the ongoing needs of government. It has

been said before but it ought to be repeated in the

context of this debate that as a percentage of gross

domestic product-I think most people would

agree that this is the fairest measure-Australian

taxation levels are not high by the standards of the

industrialised world. The Organisation for Econ-

omic Co-operation and Development average is

about 36.5 per cent. The Australian level is about

28.8 per cent which is significantly lower. In the

United Kingdom the figure is about 36 or 37 per

cent and in Western Germany it is about the

same. In Scandinavia and socialist Sweden the

figure is as high as 52 or 53 per cent. That indi-

cates that the overall level of taxation in the Aus-

tralian community is not high by the standards of

the industrial world.

Mr Robert Brown-Those figures are not
comparable.

Mr HOWARD-Those figures are comparable. I say with great respect to my honourable colleague that the figures and comparisons are used on a basis that has been employed by the OECD for a number of years. To my knowledge they have not been the subject of serious criticism as a measure by economic opinion and the opinion of people interested in taxation over the time that they have been used. Although the overall level of taxation in the Australian community is not high by the standards of the industrial world, unlike many other countries in the OECD we rely more heavily on personal taxation as a source of revenue. We rely much more heavily upon it than, for example, do most of the countries of western and northern Europe, although the countries of northern Europe rely heavily on all forms of taxation because of the requirement to support such a huge public expenditure program.

Because of our heavier reliance upon personal taxation, it was only natural that the Government should turn its mind to the mix of taxation in the Australian community. In doing so, it recognised
that there were very powerful arguments both for and against a change in that taxation mix. I do not pretend that all of the arguments as to whether a broad-based indirect tax ought to be introduced are on one side. There are very powerful arguments as to why it ought to be. There is no doubt that in straight economic terms, personal income tax, depending upon the levels, can have an effect on incentive. There is no doubt that over the years

Taxation

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 133

the impact of a progressive taxation scale in a time that the inflationary consideration was dominant

of inflation produces even more progressive in 1979 and was dominant on this occasion also.

effects and even: .'"greater disincentives .. Honourable members ought to know that Twenty-five years' i~O' ~verage weekly earnings although there is an understanding in the com-

had to be exceededsomt'17 or 18 times before one munity of perhaps some of the advantages of a

reached the upper marginal rate in the income tax change in the mix of taxation towards a greater re-

scale. Now the level is down to 2.5 to 3 times averliance on indirect taxation, there is perhaps a mis-

age weekly earnings, which gives an idea of the understanding of the arithmetic of that change.

impact of inflation under a progressive taxation For example, to reduce each of the three steps in

scale.

the present tax rate scale by one cent, that is, from

Therefore, after the last election, the Governmerit decided to conduct an examination to see whether the tithe was right to make a chang~. Essentially, three forms of broad-based indirect tax were available. They have been identified by the Asprey Committee. There was no secret about them. I think there was general agreement that if a broad-based indirect tax were to be introduced, it would be a value added tax, a retail turnover tax

60c to 59c, from 46c to 45c and from 32c to 31c, would cost the Government, in this current financial year, no less than $600m. It has been calculated that to raise about the same amount of revenue from a broadly-based indirect tax would require the imposition of a tax of one per cent. Thus, to reduce the t~x rate scale' by one cent, it is necessary to introduce an indirect tax of about one per cent.

on goods and services or the wholesale tax base Those who argue that the correct course of

would be expanded and a tax on selected services action is to bring about a major. reduction in per-

would be introduced. A value added tax is applied sonal income tax, financed by the introduction of

widely in Europe but is very cumbersome and a broad-based indirect tax, are in effect arguing

costly and may not be as "self-policing as many of that we should introduce a tax which would add 5

its protagonists argue. In reality; a value added tax per cent, 6 per cent or even 7 per cent to the rate

was never a serious option before the Governof inflation. To reduce the present income tax

ment. That was made clear by both the Prime scales in a noticeable fashion-for example, t.o re-

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and me before duce the 32c step to about 25c-wpuld involve

Christmas.

raising some $3,500m to $4,000m by way of in-

There is no doubt that of all broad-based indirect taxes, a retail turnover tax has more appealing features in that it is a tidier system and is more even and equitable than are other forms of
indirect tax. I should point out that the advice available to the Government indicated a lead time of some two years before a retail turnover tax could be implemented in respect of both goods and services. The wholesale tax base can be expanded with relative ease because there is
already in operation an administrative structure. In fact, some years ago the base of wholesale tax collection in Australia was very much broader than it is now. It was contracted in the early 1950s by a previous government, but even in that re-

direct taxes. The effect on the consumer price index would be very significant. Those who have argued in favour of reform have claimed, quite properly in my view, that if there were to be a change in the mix of taxation, it ought to be one that would be seen as such by the tax paying community-that in compensation for an increase in direct tax there ought to be noticeable reductions in the level of personal tax. Many people felt that unless such noticeable reducti~ns could be achieved, the value of bringing about the change would be lost and, in terms of creating a greater incentive it would be seen by perhaps an increasing number of people in the community as
,nothing more than the imposition of a new tax.

spect and in respect of the introduction of a tax on Therefore, in the final analysis, and conscious

services, considerable lead times were involved. that there were then, and remain, arguments for a

The arguments against the introduction of either a change in the mix of taxation in the Australian

retail turnover tax or a broadening of the wholecommunity, this Government decided last Mon-

sale tax base and the introduction of a tax qn day that principally, but not exclusively, because

selected services ultimately, in the opinion of the of the inflationary consequences and, indeed, the

Government, outweighed the benefits that could implications of the arithmetic of a change-such

be gained in effecting a change of the tax base.

as I have tried to sketch in the brief time available

The honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) says that the Government has twice rejected a move towards a retail turnover tax be-

to me-the benefits. would be outweighed by the costs, in particular in terms of ,inflationary consequences.

cause of its inflationary consequences. I would say I wish to refer to two other matters before con-

to the honourable gentleman that he is correct, cluding. First, I refer to the comments that are

134 . REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Taxation

made by the Opposition about tax avoidance. I do not suppose that there is any more tiresome, invalid or irrelevant charge made by the Opposition concerning taxation than that this Government has done very little to counter tax avoidance. I have said before, and I repeat, that the record of this Government in fighting and reducing tax avoidance in the Australian community is without parallel since the end of World War II. This Government has introduced more legislation and has been prepared to go further in identifying tax avoidance schemes than has any other government. What it has done over the last five years compares more than favourably with. the utter failure of the Opposition party to act when it was in government, despite the evidence that tax avoidance really took off in the 1970s when inflation took off. The impact of the very high ratio of inflation on the progressive taxation scale in .1974 represented the beginning of real tax avoidance in the Australian community. The failure of the then Labor Treasurer to do anything as a consequence of the decision of the High Court in the. Curran case was the beginning of the heyday of the tax avoidance industry in this community. Let that never be forgotten. Let no member of the Australian Labor Party come into this House parading as the protector of the small, wage earning, tax paying member of the community and claimingthat the Government has done nothing about tax avoidance.
Secondly, I would like to remind honourable members, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, that ultimately the overall level of taxation in the Australian community, or in any community, will depend upon the size of government and upon how big a share of the nation's resources government wishes to take unto itself, because government has no resources of its own. There can be no argument, ambiguity or equivocation as to which party in this House stands for bigger government. It is the Opposition. The Opposition stands for bigger government; it always has and it always will because it has a doctrinaire commitment to the belief that governments know better than individuals. I will again remind the honourable members for GeIlibrand of the remarks he made to the Labor Economist and he will never be allowed to forget them. I will remind the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) of what he said in his Chamberlain lecture and I will remind other members of the Opposition that their party, by its programs, doctrines and its own work and commitments, stands without qualification for bigger government and therefore it is the party of high taxation in this Parliament.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (MrMilIar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (3.46)-It does not take a great deal ofinteIligenceto refute the rather emotional remarks we have just heard from the Treasurer (Mr Howard). The argument within the Australian community about taxation is essentially an argument about priorities. It is quite clear where this Government's priorities have been with regard to taxation. When it wanted to get elected in 1975, again in 1977 and, no doubt, in 1980, it said that it wanted to reduce taxation. However, I ask the House: For whom did the Government want to reduce taxation? Certainly it was not for the ordinary wage and salary earners of this country because by any count those people are paying considerably more tax now than they have paid at any time in the history of this country. Certainly it is considerably more than they paid in 1975.
I refer par~icularly to income taxes, but that situation is true even if one does not take account of what has happened in relation to petrol taxes. The shadow Treasurer referred to a figure in this year's Budget of more than $3 billion-more than 10 per cent of the Government's revenue-which will come from this source alone. No more inequitable system of taxation could be devised by a government than one that loaded this kind of impost on the ordinary motorist. No moves have been taken by this Government to deal with the questions of equity involved in that system of taxation. It is very clear that that is because the Government has as a priority the negative redistribution of taxation. This Government is concerned with redistributing taxes so that the ordinary wage and salary earners pay more either directly or indirectly. The.Government is worried about inflation at the moment but it will come back to value added and retail taxes-indirect taxes-because that is what it is concerned about doing. It wants to increase the impost on the ordinary wage and salary earner.
Let us look at what this Government has been on about on the other side of the ledger. I believe that if we iook at that we will see where its real interests are and who it is responding to in regard to its taxation policies. I believe I can establish that what might be described as the corporate capital of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), or the robber baron, has come into an alliance with this Government to ensure that this negative redistribution occurs. Over the period that this Government has been in power less and less tax has been paid by the corporate sector and more and mor~ has been paid by ordinary wage and salary earners. Let us look at some examples,

Taxation

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 135

and I challenge someone to refute them. First of all, it has abolished all forms of capital taxes. This is the only country i'n~the Western world that has no form of capital taX~JA\ great deal was made of this issue during the election campaign. There was a great deal of emotion and mud slinging but the reality is that this Government would never face up to a commission of inquiry into the distribution of wealth, as proposed by the Opposition, because one of the first things that inquiry would establish would be that any reasonable, civilised society needs some form of capital transfer taxation. But, in 1978 this Government was responsible for abolishing estate and gift duties. They are highly minimal forms of capital taxation but nevertheless they are significant in terms of taxation equity.
Secondly, this Government is responsible, as perhaps no other government has been, for introducing a series of schemes which are designed to enable large scale corporate capital to legitimately avoid tax. These schemes include investment allowances, depreciation allowances, stock valuation adjustments and so on which have amounted to more than $2.5 billion since the Government has been in office. So the big boys of the corporate world have some more money to invest according to their priorities. Thirdly, as the honourable member for GelIibrand (Mr Willis) has pointed out, despite the Government's five years in office it has allowed tax avoidance to be a growth industry. It is all very well for the Treasurer to say that no one has done more than he has, but if there are 20 times as many people avoiding tax now as there were in 1975, what kind of success is that? It is no kind of success at all. The reason this Government has not been successful in relation to tax avoidance is that it is not serious. Ultimately it is not serious because too many mates of the Treasurer are into it. In the end, too many friends of this Government are involved in that business for it to take the drastic action required. I do not want to go any further into that, but the record speaks for itself. The Treasurer is well aware of it and he ought to come clean with the Parliament.
Fourthly, in relation to what is happening with the economy and what opportunities might have arisen, one becomes aware that more and more the economy is being built around resource-based industries. The Opposition repeatedly has made proposals with regard to a resource rent tax. It is well known that Australia is a bit of a joke in international circles because in areas such as the mining and processing of bauxite it is quite clear that the royalties being extracted by the State governments~for example, it is no more than $1

or $2 a tonne for bauxite~are quite laughable when compared with those of other bauxite producing countries. Jamaica gets $16 by way of royalties for every tonne of bauxite that it exports. Australia has welched on the International Bauxite Association by failing to force up the royalties and therefore the price of Australian bauxite so that we get a genuine return on our national resources. We are simply more interested in having a friendly relationship with some of the international resource countries than we are in achieving either justice for Australia's limited resources or a fair price for other countries which are dependent on these resources perhaps as their only major asset.
Fifthly, the Government has looked after international capital by failing to ensure that international companies with operations in Australia do not escape taxation via transfer pricing. Let us take another example from the aluminium industry. Where operations run at a higher than average cost, these costs are not passed on at the next stage. In this way operations can run at a loss in high tax countries and make their profits in low tax countries. Of course, this occurred in Jamaica in 1974, and that prompted the establishment of the IBA. In Australia a firm selling aluminium to Japan could sell the aluminium to a whollyowned subsidiary in Hong Kong at a price so that the firm paid no tax in Australia. The price from the firm in Hong Kong for aluminium sold to Japan will realise a profit that is taxed in Hong Kong, where tax is lower. Accordingly, this scheme resulted, as was revealed in a recent case involving Comalco Ltd, in achieving $4m for that company because of tax avoidance. I refer to today's Age newspaper. One might ask why the Taxation Office is not being directly represented at the inquiry into aluminium by the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources. The reason it will not be directly represented is that the Treasurer is very concerned about the revelations that would occur in relation to international resource industries such as the aluminium industry if a full investigation were made into transfer pricing. This particular industry is dominated in all of its phases by the six sisters of the world industry. They are powerful and sophisticated firms. Does anyone seriously believe that this Government will be concerned to ensure that they pay an effective or equitable rate of taxation?
Finally, I refer to a paper from the Parliamentary Library which looks at the tax record of resource companies in this regard. During the financial period 1973-79 the companies mentioned in the paper earned a before tax consolidated

136 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Taxation

operating profit of $l,OOOm but paid only $188m in company tax-tax at the rate of only 35.76 per cent. That is what is happening in this country. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the table

accompanying this paper. I have shown it to the Treasurer.
Leave granted. The document read as1ollows-

Table 1 TAX PAID BY THE AUSTRALIAN ALUMINIUM INDUSTRY
($'000)

Financial Year

1973

1974

1975

1976

Company

Consolidated

Consolidated

Consolidated

Consolidated

operating

operating

operating

operating

profit

Tax

profit

Tax

profit

Tax

profit

Tax

before tax

paid before tax

paid before tax

paid before tax

paid

Comalco Limited Alcan Australia Limited Alcoa of Australia Limited Gove Alumina Limited Swiss Aluminium Australia Limited

25,583 6,434 13,374 3,200 495

2,227

27,660 5,043
22,331 8,100
(3,083)

10,155 18

17,841 4,352 28,470 7,108 (190)

10,903 2,850

37,861 9,830 80,664 6,468 1,857

7,233 1,646

Total

49,086 2,227

60,051 10,173

57,581 13,753

136,680 8,879

TAX PAID BY THE AUSTRALIAN ALUMINIUM INDUSTRY ($'000)

Financial Year

1977

1978

1979

Company
Coma\co Limited Alcan Australia Limited Alcoa of Australia Limited Gove Alumina Limited Swiss Aluminium Australia Limited

Consolidated operating profit before tax
61,195 10,500 122,362 5,627 2,762

Tax paid
12,340 2,232
9

Consolidated operating profit before tax
,
65,568 13,398 116,161 8,945 4,278

Consolidated

operating

Tax

profit

paid

before tax

24,994 5,773
36,012

91,290 13,741 187,589 9,193 2,290

Total

202,446 14,581

'208,350 66,779

304,103

Current tax Tax provisions paid at yearend

23,020 3,997
44,324

45,360 3,648
113,922 12,906 2

71,341

175,838

Mr HOWE-In all these areas we can see the way in which this Government is biased towards the interests of corporate capital. On the one hand, the Government is increasing the burden on the ordinary wage and salary earner and, on the other, it is doing everything it can to decrease the burden on these major companies. In terms of having an economy restructured around resourcebased industries, if we are not going to have a fair taxation system we ought not to be involved in these industries at all because involvement will mean negative redistribution on a massive scale.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (3.58)-1 think that the reliance that the House can place on the

remarks of the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) can be gauged by considering one simple point, that is, that this financial year the Government brought about a reduction in taxation, dating from 1 July last year, which concentrated on the single income family, and which amounted to the order of $600m given effect, via a significant increase in the spouse allowance. So much for many of the remarks of the honourable member for Batman about negative redistribution. In general, the opportunism, the insincerity and, I might say, the hypocrisy of the Australian Labor Party in bringing forward this matter for discussion today knows no bounds. The Labor Party alleges that there is confusion in the Government's policy on taxation. There is no confusion about the central objective of the tax policy

Taxation

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 137

of this Government, which is to contain and to reduce in a responsible manner the total paid in taxation.
Does anyone douhhhat it is the Labor Party, which is the socialist big spending, high inflation, big taxing party? The honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) made reference to certain percentage figures for taxation in relation to the gross domestic product. They are worth looking at closely but time does not permit too close an inspection. If one looks at page 273 of the Budget Papers one will see that over the three years of office of the Labor Government the total receipts as a proportion of GDP went from 22.2 per cent to 25.1 per cent. They went up three percentage points from 22 per cent over three short years.
Between the first Budget of this Government, 1976-77, and the last complete one, 1979-80, they went from 25.7 per cent to 26.1 per cent. There was avery small increase but it was associated with some very significant but basic factors which are occurring in our society and which I think are worth emphasising. For example, over the last 10 years the number of age pensioners has increased from 181 per 1,000 of the working population to 339. In that context there has been this fractional increase over the whole period of office of this Government and, at the same time, a decrease in the total spending from 30 per cent to 28 per cent, which shows how we have got hold of things. I ask honourable members to reflect on that upsurge of three percentage points in three short years of Labor and to ask themselves which is the big spending, the big taxing and the high inflation party. The Australian people gave a very clear answer to that in the election oflast October.
The second point I wish to make is that it is right to say that there has been debate-a very different thing from confusion-within the Government and the public sphere about taxation. It has not been about increasing the total taxation. It has been about changing the mix of taxes, to use the expression that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) used. The problem is whether we should raise more taxes in one way and less in another way always with a view to reducing the total of taxation.
Let me get that point clear. The debate has been about changing the mix of taxation to foster better the criteria which apply to any tax system. On the one hand it is necessary for it to give incentives or to minimise disincentive effects and on the other it has to be equitable and be seen to be equitable. Under both heads there are strong arguments for changing the mix of taxation. To have a debate about these matters was a very right and

proper thing. There are very strong arguments for a substantial reduction in personal income tax, initially concentrated at low income levels, and for its replacement by a broad-based indirect tax. Under debate was a package which would at the same time increase the indirect tax, reduce the income tax and compensate those, in particular pensioners, who are not paying tax and who would be adversely affected.
There are strong arguments for this change in the mix and the Government has been looking at those arguments. One of those arguments is the very matter of tax avoidance and evasion, about which the honourable member for Gellibrand had so much to say. In that regard I am referring not only to sophisticated schemes of tax avoidance but also to the magnitude and incidence of the socalled cash economy-such as payment for work done on a cash basis that never goes into the books and never comes to the attention of the Commissioner of Taxation. People who earn or acquire money in this way get caught by an indirect tax at the point where they spend it. That is a very important argument for a broad-based tax. The honourable member for Gellibrand and the honourable member for Batman talk a lot about doing something concerning tax avoidance and evasion but the Labor Party did notl)ing when it was in government-and if this tax decision had gone the other way, the Labor Party would have done its best to undermine it and not make it work.
The overriding consideration on the other side of this argument is the impact on inflation of the introduction of such a broad-based tax, of changing the mix in that way. It is the Government's efforts in getting hold of inflation-the level of inflation last year was 9.3 per cent compared with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average of 12.4 per cent-which has led to the recovery in the economy which we are witnessing and which led to the growth in new jobs of the order of 150,000 to 200,000 last year. It is because the Government has got hold of inflation in this way that we have had this recovery and this strong growth in the economy.
I think the opportunism and insincerity of the Opposition comes to the fore on this point. There would be an initial effect on inflation of such a change in the mix of tax. There would De no increase in the total; no one is suggesting that. The problem is that there would be secondary effects through flow on and wage indexation. Do honourable members opposite think that the Labor Party would try to assist in that particular respect? The sort of proposal that could be considered if in fact it could be supported, particularly by honourable

138 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Bounty and Excise Legislation

members on the other side of the House, would be one in which, as I have said, there would be a simultaneous and equal reduction in the income tax and the corresponding introduction of the indirect tax. The later tax shows up in the price index. The reduction in income tax which can be contemplated and has been authoritatively estimated as putting into the average taxpayer's hands the same sort of money as he would be required to spend through the initial rise in prices of goods and services would not enter the price index and would not be talcen into account. Do honourable members opposite think we would get any support from them in trying, for instance, to make that point clear to the Australian public?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr Edwards-The opportunism, the hypocrisy and the insincerity of the Opposition know no bounds.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The discussion is concluded.
BOUNTY (POLYESTER-COTTON YARN) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.7)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision to extend the operation of the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978 until 31 December 1981. The existing Act expires on 31 August 1981. The Bounty (PolyesterCotton Yarn) Act 1978 provides assistance to the manufacture in Australia of polyester-cotton yarn by means of a bounty scheme. The scheme provides for the payment of a bounty to eligible manufacturers at a rate of $1.15 per kilogram on the bountiable yarn which, during the period to which the Act applies, is spun at registered premises for use in the knitting or weaving of textiles in Australia. There is a current annual limit of $600,000 on the amount available for payment of bounty.
The extension of the operation of this scheme is being made as an interim measure pending commencement on 1 January 1982 of new bounty arrangements for polyester cotton yarns. The new arrangements form part of the Government's proposed program of assistance for the textiles,

clothing and footwear industries beyond 1981. From 1 January 1982}he bounty rate for polyester-cotton yarns wil.l.);>f;: calculated as 52 per cent of factory cost v~I).l.YI,added. The amount available for payment of j:Jounty during the extended period of the current scheme will be $200,000. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
.Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
BOUNTY (NON-ADJUSTABLE WRENCHES) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.10)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision to provide temporary assistance to the industry in Australia producing non-adjustable wrenches. This assistance arrangement follows the Government's consideration of the advice and recommendations by the Temporary Assistance Authority contained in its report No. 50 of 14 August 1980 entitled: 'NonAdjustable Spanners'. The Government has accepted the Temporary Assistance Authority's recommendation that temporary assistance, in the form of a production bounty, be accorded to this industry in Australia. The Bill provides for the bounty to be payable at the rate of llc on each bountiable implement having a local content exceeding 50 per cent. This scheme is to operate for a period of one year and bounty payments during that period are limited to a maximum of $620,000.
During its inquiry the Temporary Assistance Authority found that the local industry's overall activity has declined over the past 4 or 5 years while imports of competing products has increased. In the past 3 years the total domestic market share held by the major Australian manufacturer, Siddons Industries Ltd, has declined from 25 per cent to 16 per cent. However in this same period the local market for the tools increased from 16.5 million to 20 million units and imports also increased from 12.5 million to 16 million units. In recommending the bounty assistance for this industry the Temporary Assistance Authority was concerned to ensure that the assistance provided will have an immediate effect but will only affect those areas of the market supplied by the local industry. The Government expects that the assistance as proposed by this Bill will restore previous activity levels and thus enable the

Inter-Government Relations Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 139

local industry to compete more adequately against the imported products. An asses~ment of the need for the continuation of the bounty assistance beyond 12 months will be undertaken by the Industries Assistance Commission as part of its report on cutlery, industrial knives and hand tools due to be submitted to the Government by 30 June 1981. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
COAL EXCISE AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan~Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.12)~1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949. The amendment will extend to 28 days the period within which entries for home consumption may be made for coal ~emoved from a coal mine during a period approved by a collector of customs. The Coal Excise Act 1949 contains machinery provisions to enforce the collection of excise duties imposed on coal for the purposes of financing long service leave benefits granted to certain employees in the coal mining industry and for the funding of the Coal Research Trust Account.
Section 24 ~"\ of this Act permits coal to be removed from a coal mine during a period, usually a calendar month, approved by the collector of customs without entry if a deposit of money, or if a guarantee in respect of the duty on the coal has been given by the coal producer. However, section 24 (4) provides that the entry in respect of the coal removed from the coal mine during the approved period shall be made not later than seven working days after the expiration of the period. The Government has decided to extend the period to 28 days as seven days has proven to be unnecessarily restrictive. This is particularly so in cases where coal producers do not possess their own weighing facilities and need to obtain their production figures from accumulated weighbridge certificates issued by State railway authorities. Unavoidable delays also occur when centralised payments of duty are made by parent companies which have widespread subsidiary collieries. I commend the Bill to honourable members. '"
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR INTER-GOVERNMENT RELAnONS
AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 4 December 1980, on motion by Mr Fife:
That the Bill be now read a second time,
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.15)~ln 1969 Professor Russell Mathews of the Australian National University who was the first Chairman of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations and is currently Director of the Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations wrote the following:
The Australian Federal system was conceived in the 1890s as a means of unifying the six colonies, but by the 1960s it had become the most divisive force in Australian society and the chief factor responsible for economic inefficiency and inadequacy in the public sector.
He went on:
The continuing crisis in Commonwealth-State finance must be seen as an unnecessary yoke around the necks of the Australian people. It is as disadvantageous to the Commonwealth as to the States, and as the dominant partner it is the Commonwealth which must take the initiative in resolving the crisis, If the Australian economy is not to be wrecked by the impasse in intergovernmental relations, a new kind of federal system must be devised, one which provides a clear division of administrative responsibility and financial viability for each level of government.
Professor Mathews also wrote:
Planning for national development can proceed effectively only if it is based on workable machinery for resource allocation throughout the public sector.
The tragedy for Australia is that those words are as true now as they have been at any time over the last 12 years. As the Bill before the House puts us a little closer to creating the necessary mechanisms with which we can come to grips quickly, efficiently and imaginatively with the economic and social upheavals that face all Australians during the, 1980s and beyond, I state that the Opposition welcomes this Bill, has no objection to it and, indeed, supports it.
As we know, this is a Bill for an Act to amend the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Act 1976. It is not a major Bill. It is more of a machinery Bill. But it does not give us an opportunity, under the heading of sins of omission in this whole area of inter-governmental relations to discuss those relations in this country. But first of all I would like to draw some attention to details of the Bill. Section 4 (1) of that principal Act states that the Council was established with the object of improving inter-governmental cooperation and that it shall, in accordance with directions given at Premiers Conferences, inquire into, keep under consideration and review matters

140 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Inter-Government Relations Bill

relating to inter-governmental co-operation. This Bill leaves the substantive provisions of the principal Act as I have quoted it to the House untouched. The Minister for Education (Mr Fife) in his second reading speech said:
These amendments--
That is, the amendments which are contained in this Bill-
are aimed principally at reinforcing the Council's independence in the performance of its functions by providing for the Council to become a body corporate with its own bank account, to have control over its staffing arrangements, exempting the Council from Commonwealth and State taxation laws and by making it clear that the Council is not subject to direction by or on behalf of the Commonwealth.
If we are to have a proper council, even though it is only of an advisory nature, made up of people representing all three tiers of government plus people from the community generally, of course we must have a council with such independence.
The changes that I have listed and that are in this Bill do require consequential amendments to other parts of the Bill to ensure appropriate financial accountability in relation to auditing, accounting procedures and financial. reporting. The amendments are of themselves neither extraordinary sources of controversy nor the type of matter likely to rekindle fervent States-righters' passions. However, as a representative from this Parliament on the Advisory Council for Intergovernment Relations I know that these amendments are necessary for the proper functioning of that Advisory Council.
What is significant about these essentially bread and butter provisions is that they have taken so long to be brought into even draft form. Although I was not a member of the first Advisory Council, I have been attending since the first Hobart meeting of that Advisory Council as a proxy for others. I have not been able to attend every meeting of the Advisory Council in the intervening five years or so but I have either been a proxy or a substantive member of the Advisory Council during those five years. I know for how long it has been clear that these arnendments were necessary and how long it has taken to bri'ng them to this House. All of this shows up how difficult it is to run this cumbersome federation of ours.
Centralists will no doubt note with some degree of amusement that the relatively minor changes embodied in the Bill have had to be agreed to by the Federal Government, the State Premiers, the Australian Council of Local Government Associations and the Advisory Council itself. The fact that this is the main reason why it has taken five years for these important provisions to come as

close as this to being inserted in the Act-we cannot say they are yet in thlf~Act; not only does the Bill have to pass throug~\t,his chamber but, of course, it also has to) PlWt'l through the other one-in itself is hardly a sqining example of the efficiency of co-operative federalism. I wish the wheels ran more smoothly so that it did not take so long for these things to happen.
I assert that had the present Government's actions matched its rhetoric in being seriously concerned with reforming the state of intergovernmental relations in Australia, the provisions now being inserted in the Act by way of this Bill would have been so inserted a long time ago. Admittedly we are concerning ourselves here only with an advisory council. But if we cannot get this Advisory Council's house in order efficiently and quiCkly, how can we expect something meaningful to be done about the substance of the subject of intergovernmental relations?
Before making some more general observations about the development of federalism in Australia-and this is pertinent when we are referring to this Advisory Council which has a wide charter-I draw the attention of the House to one section of the Bill about which I feel uneasy. I refer to clause 6 of the Bill which states:
Section 4 of the Principal Act is amended by inserting after sub-section (I) the following sub-section:
'(lA) In the performance of its function, the Council shall not be subject to any directions other than directions referred to in sub-section (I).'
This refers particularly to the meaning of 'direction' as amplified by section 4 (2) ofthe Aet. .
It is necessary for me to state what sub-section 2 is all about. Sub-section (2) states:
The reference in sub-section (I) to directions given at the Premiers Conference shall be read as a reference to directions given by the Prime Minister and the Premiers of the participating States, or their representatives, at a conference known as the Premiers Conference.
From this one can see that the Commonwealth and the States have an advantage over the third level of government-that is, local government~ which is not represented at the Premiers Conference. The Australian Local Government Association could have been given the right, in my view, to place matters before the Council directly or could have been given the right to make suggestions as to what should be placed before the Council. That not having been done, it can be said that local government is at a disadvantage, is not on all fours with and is not equal to the other tiers of government in matters concerning the working of this Advisory Council. However, I recognise that this would have had its difficulties and would have been frankly more of a token than a matter

Inter-Government Relations Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 141

of substance because representatives of local government, as, indeed, other members of the Council, have their '6pportunity of placing issues to be pursued befoH~q the Council. However, tokens such as the ~flstfalian Local Government Association being able to at least make suggestions directly to the Council rather than through its local government representatives on the Council are important and should not be overlooked.
It should not be ignored that my political opponents in the Liberal and National Country parties are continually reluctant to give the consideration and status to local government which that important area deserves. This is not the only example where that situation applies. Of course, in the 19708 we had debates in this Parliament and elsewhere in the community concerning firstly giving local government a voice in Loan Council meetings. The Labor Party has been in lavour of that but the Liberal and National Country parties, in their conservative moulds, have. not been in favour of that. I repeat that this is just another example of the Labor Party championing local government to give it greater status in our feder~ ation than has been done to date.
Put quite bluntly the Fraser Government has little interest at all in the development of local or regional government and is concerned only with State governments out of fear. In a paper entitled 'Federalism and Efficiency' A. J. Robinson of the Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations at the Australian National University set out four criteria for evaluating the success of federal systems. I suggest that these are criteria which the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations should always bear in mind. As set out by Mr Robinson they are: Firstly, independence; secondly, financial viability; thirdly, accountability; and, fourthly, economic efficiency.
If the record of the Fraser Government is assessed on these criteria then we can see very clearly just what a mess our federation is in. I will give a few examples. Let us take the subject of resources which is one of the subjects at which the Advisory Council easily could be looking; the division of functions between the three tiers of government in relation to the great issue of resources-it was a great issue of the I980s-about which everyone in public life is talking. If one merely mentions the words 'aluminium' and 'coal' one immediately has in one's mind a picture of relative chaos because of a lack of leadership and co-ordination on the part of the present national government. There was enormous controversy in Victoria over Portland. There was controversy in the Hunter River about the prices of power being charged to the various aluminium projects which are in the

pipeline. These are areas where, in my view, the national Government should have a role. It is the sort of thing in which the Advisory Council for Inter-governmental Relations will be interested when it gets round to it. It is in chaos now.
A similar situation applies in relation to immigration. The Commonwealth has sole constitutional authority in this area but it still needs to co-operate with the States and local governments to integrate migrants into our community. This has always been recognised at allleve1s of government. Honourable members should pause for a moment to consider the present refugee settlement problems in areas such as Fairfield in New South Wales and the disgraceful facilities to be found at Pennington in my State. Mr Deputy Speaker, you will be aware that my State is South Australia but that needs to be put into the record. These are all intergbvernmental relations problems needing the attention of the Advisory Council.
The salinity of the water in the Murray River was raised in the House today during Question Time. The South Australian State Liberal Government is crying out for a Commonwealth lead in this matter. So far there has been no response. It is another example of chaos.in the field of intergovernmental relations. For so long this great river of our nation has become silted and has greater and greater salinity problems. Honourable members might ask why. It is because of the intergovernmental relations problems. Failure to exercise clear constitutional power by one arm of government often leads to these problems. Need one go further than merely mention the phrase: 'Aboriginal rights in Queensland and Western Australia'? One might ask from time to time when problems like Noonkanbah are raised why we had a referendum in 1967. What clearer indication could we have of the nation wanting this Commonwealth Parliament to take a lead? I hope that the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations will bring light where there is darkness over these questions. 'It is most important that we should have a Bill such as this one improving its mechanisms.
Companies and securities legislation is another area where there is chaos between the various tiers of government. As stated so clearly last night by the shadow Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, Mr John Brown, the circuitous route taken by the Government in enacting this legislation is totally inefficient and has left Australianshareholders open to the same abuses that damaged the reputation of our stock exchanges with both local and overseas investors in the late 1970s. We have waited for years for satisfactory

142 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Inter-Government Relations Bill

legislation and the excuse that we have been given as to why we have not had it, is, of course, because of this snarl up in intergovernmental relations. This is another area where I think the legislation that is going through this House will not be satisfactory. The methods of amendment certainly will not be satisfactory. Indeed we are hopeful that the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations eventually will be able to bring light and more sense to bear on these problems than hitherto has happened.
I will end this list of the sorts of problems that will be-if they are not already-before this Advisory Council with the whole matter of Commonwealth-State-Iocal government financial relations. Mr Deputy Speaker, I might just interpose there, in case you think I am getting a little wide of the Bill, that we have right now before the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations an enormous reference known as the relationships reference. This involves the relationship between those three tiers of government and, of course, financial relationships are at the heart of that problem. Total grants to States and local government have not kept pace with inflation. In other words they decline substantially in real terms. Socalled 'new federalism', of course, has not been carried through and the whole area is presently in a mess. In the past few days we have had new announcements as to when the next Premiers Conference will be to seek yet another solution to this very complex problem.
The country is still seeking a formula to replace the Whitlam one of six years ago. What is the result? Grants to States have not kept pace with increases in the federal Government's own expenditure. State governments and, in particular, local governments have been forced to increase borrowings at times of high interest rates. Therefore, increased grants have been eroded both by inflation and the need to make higher interest payments. In addition, there has been the need to make increased repayments on the debts themselves. So residents of this country have suffered increased State government charges and local government rates because of the unsatisfactory state of intergovernmental financial arrangements.
The difficulties of our federation, of our intergovernmental relations, are great. I have made mention of only some of those difficulties but the Advisory Council is bringing some light-I repeat a phrase that I used earlier-where there has been darkness. I am glad that there is some-activity however modest. The Advisory Council's first reference was about the interchangeability of staff

between the three tiers of government. That report has been well rece~Yi!?d. I. wish there were more action in that direc,tlpn following from the report because a closel;,w.9rl<.ing relationship between the administrationsi,of the three tiers of government would be of great benefit to us all. Mr Deputy Speaker, I have already commented upon the next reference. The look in your eye was such that I thought you were just about to tell me that my remarks were not close enough to the Bill. But I have saved you from doing so and I showed you just how pertinent my remarks were when I referred to that reference on the relationship between the three tiers of government. It is an enormous one. Many discussion papers of great quality have been commissioned and published leading up to recommendations which will be made under this wide heading. At last we now have more people thinking about these grave problems.
I notice that the honourable member for Sturt (Mr Wilson) will probably follow me in this debate. He has been a member of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations as has another honourable member from this Parliament. I might say quickly that, whilst the honourable member is from South Australia, the whole of the membership of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations is not from South Australia, although a lot of the quality is from that State. I have been pleased to be a representative on the Council. We have a good staff and I pay tribute to their work. I believe that there is a genuine attempt to address the serious problems before the Council on the part of all members. Inevitably, progress has been slow. One of the reasons for this has been the administrative difficulties caused by the inadequacies of the Act under which we have been working, and those inadequacies are addressed in the legislation before us. However, let no one think that this 1egislatioI;l will address itself to improving intergovernmental relations other than in the most indirect way. For that improvement, much more good will and far less emotional rhetoric is required Jrom many elected leaders and others in this country. The recent wranglings between the Liberal Party and the National Country Partyin Queensland testify that, if anything, these issues have been getting worse, not better, in recent years. The challenges of the resources boom, of technological advances and structural change demand that our federal system further -the interests of all Australians, not fetter them. I repeat that this requires good will built on knowledge, and at least the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations is increasing that body of knowledge.

Inter-Government Relations Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 143

The approach of the Labor Party will continue to be pragmatic. We scorn such labels as centralist or States' righters. ;We genuinely believe ir, cooperative federalisrttfiitid, will facilitate all means of making it work, means such as getting advice from the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations. We want administration to be carried out as close to the people as possible. We shall facilitate this being done, wherever it is viable and generally feasible, close to the people and even at local government level. We also believe in one Australia; not seven or eight separate, jealous little kingdoms. We believe in planning and coordination, and this means a lean, active, sensitive Federal Government working in co-operation with State, Territory and local governments to fulfil people's needs. Inefficient, flabby administrations are of interest to no one. Overbearing, authorative, removed, out of touch, centralist bureaucracies similarly are not supported by us in the Labor Party.
I come back to the words I used earlier. We believe in the pragmatic approach to co-operative federalism. We seek better ways to bring about this co-operation. We support the work of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations in researching those better ways. On behalf of the Opposition I support this Bill, which will improve the administration of the ACIR so that it can achieve its purposes more readily.
Mr WILSON (Sturt) (4.48)-As a member representing this Parliament on the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations, I want to take just a few minutes of the time of the House to support the Advisory Council for Intergovernment Relations Amendment Bill. I believe that, as was manifest in much of what the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) had to say, the Opposition has taken a genuine role within the Advisory Council in seeking to fulfil the objectives for which that Council was established of enabling the relationships between the three spheres of government in this country to be improved.
I guess that there would be some difference between myself and the honourable member for Adelaide in our understandings and definitions of federalism. In his concluding remarks in this debate he talked about his desire to see decentralised administration. He wants administration close to the people. My understanding of federalism goes one step further. I want to see, government, the decision-making process, taken closer to the people. It is no good having all the policies determined by a central government here in Canberra and having a few delegates out on the ground administering those policies at the local level. In

many instances, the people want the legislative decisions to be taken at the local level. That is why I am a great supporter of a three-sphered system of government within this country, with each sphere having discrete and sometimes overlapping legislative responsibility, so that wherever possible the laws governing a community or a State can be determined as close as possible to the people affected by those laws.
We have come a long way since 1901. Under our system of government, in a federation that came about by the decision of six separate colonies to ask the United Kingdom Government to form them into one nation circumstances have changed. The relationships between State and Federal governments have altered, as have the very role and essence of local government. In the early 1970s there were severe and substantial tensions between the spheres of government. As a result of observing those tensions from a position on the Opposition benches of this House, the present Government parties examined this whole question and presented to the Australian people what is known as the Government's federalism policy. An essential element of that policy was the establishment of the Advisory Council for Intergovernment Relations. The legislation now before us is merely to assist in the proper workings of that Council. As the honourable member for Adelaide has pointed out, the Council's functions and role really have not been prejudiced too severely by the problems that are addressed in this legislation. Certainly it will be easier for the Council properly to discharge its functions with an Act in a form more suited to the fundamental and underlying objectives of the Council.
The honourable member for Adelaide drew attention to the fact that references go to the Advisory Council in a variety of ways, the principal method being through the Premiers Conference, which is a conference comprised of the Prime Minister and the six State Premiers. When the Premiers Conference refers to the Advisory Council for examination the relationships which should exist between Federal, State and local governments and leaves it then to the Advisory Council-established with a degree of independence comprising as it does representatives of the Parliaments of the six States, of this Parliament, of local government in each of the six States, and of the citizens through five citizen members-it seems to me that the Council has it within its power to take up any subject which any of its members are able to bring to its attention and persuade it to examine. As I have pointed out, its members represent each sphere of government as well as the general citizenry.

144 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Inter-Government Relations Bill

In the early stages of its work the Council has concentrated, as requested by the Premiers Conference, on an examination of the relationships that exist between Commonwealth and State governments, with local government. I was interested to hear the honourable member for Adelaide try to claim that the members of his party had a rather unique relationship with local government. I believe that history will record that local government has advanced most in maturing as a sphere of government, with a degree of autonomy and independence, during the term of office of the Fraser Government. During that period not only has local government achieved a share of income tax at a very high level-a 2 per cent share which has underpinned the resource base of local government-but also, as a result in part of the work of the Advisory Council, local government's aspirations and involvement in government within Australia have increased quite significantly. Because of what has occurred over the last five years, that process will continue in the future as the stature of local governments increases.
I wish to refer to two matters. One arises out of the second reading speech made by the Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs (Mr Fife) on introducing the legislation into the House. He drew the attention of the House to the fact that, although the Northern Territory does not at present have representation on the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations, it has sought admission as a full member of the Council on the same basis as that of each of the six States. As the Minister pointed out, the Commonwealth supports this change, which will require a future amendment to the Advisory Council for Intergovernment Relations Act. The Minister pointed out also that the Government is actively seeking the agreement of all States to this measure. I hope it will not .be long before that agreement is achieved because the Northern Territory has been set by this Government on a road of constitutional development which at some time will lead to its becoming Australia's seventh State.
The Northern Territory was granted the form of self-government it now has and it has responded to the challenge of that responsibility in the way that it has. As each year goes by it becomes increasingly difficult, in a political sense, for the powers conferred on the elected Assembly of the Northern Territory to be withdrawn by this Parliament. I know that in a technical sense the Northern Territory legislation, the Act which gave it self-government, could be repealed. But in a practical sense the capacity of this Parliament to

withdraw that authority becomes less and less as time goes by. As time elapses, it will become more appropriate to give serious consideration to creating the Northern Territory into a State on a partnership basis with the original States of the Commonwealth. That raises some major problems. It may well be that it is the sort of issue which the Advisory Council on its own initiative should take up one day, or maybe it should be taken up at the request of the Premiers Conference.
The issues to which I refer relate to the circumstances in which a Territory, such as the Northern Territory, can become a State of the Commonwealth. I draw the attention of the House to the Constitution for a moment. Under section 7 of the Constitution the Senate is established. It is to be composed of senators, chosen by the people, from each State. I emphasise the words 'chosen by the people'. The section requires also that there shall be equal representation of the-sever'll original States. The Northern Territory, if it becomes a State, will not be an original State. Section 24 of the Constitution provides that the members of this House, if coming from an original State, must be chosen by the people. Their numbers must be, as nearly as practicable, twice the number of senators. The members allocated to each State must be allocated in proportion to the respective popUlation of the State. But the section does not stop there. It contains a guarantee in respect of the original States. It states:
But notwithstanding anything in this section, five members at least shall be chosen in each original State.
The Northern Territory is not, nor can it ever become, an original State. The question arises of the terms and conditions under which the Northern Territory could be admitted as a State of the Commonwealth. At present the Northern Territory has representation in this House and in the Senate by virtue of the provisions of section 122. That section confers on this Parliament the right to confer the representation of a Territory in either House of the Parliament. There are two significant features of that section and of section 121, which confers on this Parliament the capacity to confer on a new State representation in both Houses of this Parliament. The first distinguishing feature is that the representatives of a Territory need not be chosen by the people. At present they are chosen by the people and they choose very good members. But there is no constitutional guarantee that the members representing a Territory or a new State shall be chosen by the people. The fact that that is the case will be a sticking point when States are invited to consider whether they agree to the idea of the Northern Territory at

Inter-Government Relations Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 145

some time in the future becoming a State. We need to look at the desirability of amending the Constitution to require that members from Territories and new States shall be chosen by the people.
The second distinguishing feature is that neither of those sections limits the representation in this House or in the Senate in the same way as the representation from the original States is limited; that is, the numbers in the House of Representatives are to be as nearly as practicable, twice the number in the Senate and the number of senators from each original State are to be the same. One is faced with this difficulty: Should a new State have the same number of senators as the original States?
I think that will be a problem to the original States. Should the ratio of senators to members from a new State be one senator to two members of the House of Representatives, the numbers from the House of Representatives being determined by the population of the new State? My view is that the guarantee given to the original States-that is, that there shall be no fewer than five members in the House of Representatives and an equal number of senators-should not apply to a new State. I say that in the interest of prospective new States, and in particular the Northern Territory, because I believe that if they press for the same rights as the original States they will never be granted statehood. If their representation in this House and in the Senate is related, firstly, to population and, secondly, to the nexus between the number of members in the Senate and in the House of Representatives, I think there is greater opportunity for the Northern Territory to become a new State and, by virtue of that if not by virtue of earlier admission, to become a full member of the Advisory Council for Intergovernment Relations.
Another matter to which I wish to refer in the remaining minutes available to me is section92 of the Constitution. We all know what section 92 is about. It is the section which guarantees that trade between the States shall be absolutely free. I also wish to draw the attention of the House to section 90 of the Constitution which provides that on the imposition of uniform duties of customs the power of the Parliament to impose duties of customs and excise and to grant bounties on the production or export of goods shall become exclusive. That exclusiveness puts a prohibition on the States' granting bounties on the production or export of goods. This is dealt with further in section 91 of the Constitution. One of the purposes of the founding fathers of the Constitution was to create within Australia a common market. But

over the 80 years since Federation the States have become great entrepeneurs. They have granted State preferences. In that process they are distorting the elements of the common market within Australia.
I think that as the years go by towards the next century it will become essential that in any examination of the relationships that should exist between the three spheres of government and between governments at the State level we should examine the effect and the desirability of the distorting interstate preferences that now apply. Sometimes they are applied because cheap land or power is made available. Sometimes they are applied because a State government will not purchase from another State except by imposing in effect some sort of indirect tariff. A State may say that it will not purchase goods from another State unless they are priced at, say, 20 per cent less than the goods produced in the State purchasing them. I do not believe that we can tolerate the circumstances in which the Australian economy is balkanised by State governments while the Commonwealth Government is trying to make the Australian economy competitive in world terms. Time does not permit me to enlarge upon that issue except to point to the fact that I believe that it is a matter which one day should be carefully examined by the Advisory Council on Intergovernment Relations, either on its own initiative or by reference from the Premiers' Conference, whichever is appropriate, so that these issues can be examined and the relationships within the spheres of government in Australia improved. This legislation will go a long way to establishing permanently the Advisory Council, making its operations more effective and enabling it to achieve even more than it has achieved so far. What it has achieved already is noteworthy. It needs to be examined carefully by all members of this House and the Parliament who are interested in improving the relationships among the spheres of government in Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (4.58)-The Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations represents Commonwealth, Stat.e and local governments. It is an advisory body which undertakes research studies, analyses submissions and so on. Given the deteriorating state of relations between the Federal Government and the States, particularly with regard to the sharing of finance and the handling of the so-called resources boom, there is certainly scope for such an authority and the streamlining of its procedures. Inasmuch as the

146 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Inter-Government Relations Bill

amendments to this Bill seek to improve the Council's ability to perform its functions by the provision of improved staffing arrangements, exemptions from Commonwealth and State tax laws and the strengthening of its independent role, the Opposition does not oppose the legislation. But it must be said that the Government's new federalism has been a failure.
The means of providing Commonwealth funding to the States is through the general tax sharing agreement-at present the formula is 39.87 per cent of total tax receipts-through specific purpose grants involving payments and loans for purposes such as housing, hospitals, roads and so on, through general purpose capital funds which comprise the approved Loan Council program and through capital grants to the States and to their statutory authorities. Those elements make up the package. Of course, in addition, there is now a special infrastructure borrowing program to allow the States access to extra funds to provide the ports, railways and power stations necessary to service the so-called resource development boom. Under this Government's new federalism, or should I say new feudalism, it has sought to force the States to impose their own income taxes by the gloriously simple tactic of reducing specific purpose grants. This has occurred despite the explosion in income tax receipts and the revenue from the Government's misguided oil policy. As a percentage of total revenue receipts, income tax receipts have risen from 38 per cent of total receipts in 1975 to 50 per cent of total receipts in 1980. This has occurred during the term of the socalled low tax government. Oil revenue this financial year will be $3.25 billion. The Government says it recognises that income tax is too high and that the oil levy will eventually decline. Yet all we have seen is continued indecision, plenty of papers, leaked policies and proposals which are looked at, discussed and inevitably rolled.
Mr Fife-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am always interested to listen to the honourable member for Cunningham but I wonder about the relevance of what he is saying now to the Bill before the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-I thank the Minister for his comments. I am in a difficult position having just assumed the chair. I had a yarn with the previous occupant before he left. He pointed out that he had allowed a certain amount of looseness to the previous two speakers. I guess I am beholden to do the same thing for the honourable member for Cunningham. However, I would like him to remember that this is not really the sort of Bill on which to launch an attack on governments. He must relate his remarks to the

nature of the Advisory Council for Inter-

government Relations Ame.ndment Bill which we

are considering.

01,.

Mr WEST-WhatilFJllope to show is that everything I am saying about tax formulas relates to future inter-government relations. I will discuss how the States will get money from the Loan Council and what sort of new formula they intend to press for at the coming Premiers' Conference. I thank you for your latitude, Mr Deputy Speaker, but it was my understanding that a wide ranging discussion of these matters would be allowed in the debate on this Bill. The Government and the States need plenty of advice from the Advisory Council on all these matters. I will keep what you say in mind, Mr Deputy Speaker. I will now discuss the possible formula in the future and what sorts of taxes will be involved. I ask the Minister for Education (Mr Fife), who is at the table, to bear with me.

In 1978 the Government flirted with a resources tax to tap the super profits of various mining companies and the exploitation and export of non-renewable minerals and energy. It then renounced such a policy on numerous occasions. Now the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) emphasises the benefits of the new surge of resource development which, he says, should be shared with the Australian people, the States, the community and local government but he refuses to explain how it will occur. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Treasury endorse the concept of regressive and inflationary indirect taxes such as increased wholesale or turnover tax and are then rolled by the Prime Minister. Over all this-this is very important for the new formula that the States will adopt-hang the rantings of the National Party supporting flat rate taxes. Under this policy, with such a tremendous decline in taxation revenue, how will the States fare with their share of 39.87 per cent?

The truth is that this Government is caught in its own short sightedness. Indigenous oil currently provides $3.2 billion or 9.3 per cent of total revenue. But as this revenue declines as oil reserves decline the Government will be forced to examine tax restructuring and increases, not decreases, in personal income tax. It is the inevitable result of the Government's oil pricing rip-off which it will not share with the States. I ask the Advisory Council take note of that. On the one hand, we can examine imposing taxes on unearned wealth-capital gains taxes-although not on family homes and a resources rent tax. On the other hand, we as a Federal Parliament can choose, as the Government has perhaps considered, imposing increased indirect taxation.

Inter-Government Relations Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 147

The Opposition does not favour the imposition of increased indirect taxation. Perhaps we should look again at the situation of new oil fields such as Fortescue in Bass Strait. As a result of the Government's c1assifyin.g its product as new oil, a loss of at least $3.5 billion in revenue has been incurred-revenue in which the States might have shared. But the Government has renounced all of these options now. I ask the States, as they line up for the next Premiers Conference, to remember that. The Government is against resources taxes or any extension of its oil levy to include Fortescue. It has denounced taxes on unearned wealth and yesterday closed the option of imposing indirect taxation. What will the Government do? No wonder the States are confused, as they come to the April Premiers Conference, as to which tax sharing formula they should support.
Should they support a formula which gives them a percentage of local income tax revenue or one which gives them a percentage of total tax revenue? ,If a resources rent tax, and alternative taxes to increased income taxes were to be imposed, the States should opt for a percentage of the total tax base. But since the Government has closed off all opt,ions other than increased income taxes the government of New South Wales is probably right. In this confusing situation, a percentage of total income taxes may best suit the States. Whatever the Government says, we may expect that the income tax base will expand. It has ruled out all the other options. However, if the' Government intends to cut income taxes it must also cut further specific purpose payments to the States.
Mr Fife-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Bill before the House seeks to amend the Inter-government Relations Act of 1976. I appreciate, Mr Deputy Speaker, that you have given all speakers a fair degree of latitude in addressing themselves to this Bill but I submit that the honourable member is now canvassing matters that could be the subject of discussion at the forthcoming Premiers Conference and in no way is relating his remarks to the Bill before the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER '(Mr Giles)-The Chair is in some difficulty. I notice that the second reading speech of the Minister states that one of the purposes of the Council as it affects Premiers Conferences, for instance, is 'to inquire into and keep under consideration and review matters relating to intergovernment co-operation and in particular, ways and means of improving intergovernment co-operation'.

Mr West-I also want to discuss the Loan Council programs.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to listen to what I am ~aying. This is a very difficult area. I want to keep the debate on a constructive basis, one concerning how this Bill can help achieve co-operation between governments. The honourable member would help me if he confined his remarks to those of an attacking nature. I do not mind which of the three tiers of government he is attacking but I ask him to try to make his remarks as helpful as possible concerning the meaning of the Bill before the House. I am afraid that at this stage I cannot agree with the Minister's contention because the ~ill is very wide in its scope. I call the honourable member for Cunningham.
Mr WEST-Thank you,Mr Deputy Speaker, for your understanding of what this Bill is about. The Minister does not seem to understand it. We are talking about problems that will arise in Commonwealth-State relations and how this Advisory Council can help in that regard. I understand that it is able to act on its own initiative in some of these matters. When I was interrupted, I was saying that if the Government having ruled out all of the options that seem to be available to it-other than that of increasing income taxes-in fact cut income taxes we could also expect further cuts in specific purpose payments to the States. That is what the Opposition is worried about. I think, to be fair, that the problem could be compounded by the States' lack of perception of the long term consequences of greatly accelerating the development of minerals and minerals processing. In my view, the States should understand that those who presently control the Treasury will certainly advise this Government to cut even further funds for health, housing and public transport, in order to permit Loan Council borrowing programs to provide for infrastructure development to service the resources boom-if they should go down that track too far.
Although private capital expenditure on' resources development in the next six or seven years may not be as high as the $33 billion outlined by the Department of Industry and Commerce, it will certainly be considerable. For instance, some $4 billion in private capital expenditure is expected in respect of the North West Shelf. The Government's report envisages expenditures of $6.4 billion for coal development in New South Wales and Queensland and approximately $6.3 billion for the aluminium smelting industry. The bauxite and aluminium smelting proposals will probably amount to a total of $8 billion, if one includes the expenditure of $300m upon a new

148 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Inter-Government Relations Bill

smelter at Bundaberg and $1,300m in Western Australia. All of this development requires infrastructure, including power stations constructed by the States at public expense. The majority of the funds for this will be provided by the Loan Council.

Under the special program, provision has

already been made for State borrowing of

$5 OOOm over pu'rposes, but

the next 10 this figure

years for does not

einvfernasbtreugci~tutroe

state the total requirement during that pen~d.

For instance three States only-Queensland, VIC-

toria and Ne:.v South Wales-are committed to an

expenditure of $11.2 billion in order to provide

16,000 extra megawatts of power, of which 3,200

megawatts or 20 per cent will be used for alu-

minium smelting. This, according to the De-

partment of National Development and Energy,

will cost $3.2 billion. Given that Western

Australia will be exporting the majority of its

natural gas from the North West Shelf in the fore-

seeable future, that State will be looking towards

either coal fired power generation or nuclear

power for aluminium smelting. The pity of it all-

and the Opposition is not against development,

merely seeking its rationalisation-is ~hat t~e

States in insisting on their right to polIce theIr

own development, are indulging in demeaning

and anti-Australian competition to provide infra-

structure and power on the cheap to these foreign

multinational mineral and energy companies.

The Federal Government, through the Loan Council program, must give approval to the financing of this infrastructure development. What I am saying is highly relevant to the work of this Advisory Council. For instance, the Victorian public should not be asked to subsidise Alcoa to the extent of $2 billion in the provision of power
over the next 25 or 30 years, nor should the New South Wales ,Government be providing power in the Hunter Valley for some 1.6c a kilowatt hour, which is one-third less than the charge to other major industrial, continuous consll:mers such as Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd. Smce the Commonwealth provides and integrates Loan Council finance this Government, at least, should be demanding to know what the State Electricity Commissions are charging for their power. I was appalled to hear, during the recent inquiry into these matters by the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources, the representatives of the relevant Departments of Trade and Resources, National Development and Energy and Industry and Commerce informed the Committee that they had no idea what these power prices were to be. This was the case, despite the fact that the Commonwealth will have to authorise a great

deal of the money through Loan Council borrow-
ing programs for the c~nstruction of the~e stations. One has to say t11'at the Government 'IS completely remiss in -'i1& imposing a n~tional rationalisation of resoutct;!~ development m the
public infrastructure, for which the States .c~me here seeking money. How many alummlUm smelters should there be? That is the question that We should be asking in relation to this aspect of resource development and the provision of infrastructure. What type should they be? Where should they be and how much of the infrastructure can this nation afford to provide, through the Budget in August or the Premiers Conference, without damaging other areas of resource allocation? If the States can afford to provide coal at $14 a tonne to State Electricity Commissions, then borrow from the Commonwealth and hawk
power at absurdly cheap rates br world st.andards, surely there is a case for federal mterventIOn, for a federal resources tax or an aluminium export tax in which the States could then share with the Commonwealth through an appropriate sharing arrangement. Other people, in addition ~o members of the Opposition, are aware of thIS. Even some very strong sections of the Australian business community would support what I am saying. As today's Australian Financial Review states:

There is no reason why the Federal Government should not collect that element of excess profits which the State Governments forego in the process of competing for progress.

But in the end, as the Queensland Government

has already demonstrated, if the Federal Govern-

ment leaves a vacuum by, for instance, reducing

coal export levies or refusing to introduce a re-

sources tax eventually the States, if it suits them,

may impose their own less efficient and narrowly

based charges. For the first time, Que~nsla?d c.ol-

lections for State revenues from the raIl frelghtmg

loefviceosailneQx~ceeeednesdlatnhde

revenue from the

from Utah

federal coal project. No

wonder Mr Bjelke-Petersen got out on the stump

during the McPherson by-election campaign a~d

said that there were no resource taxes m

Queensland. As soon as we make the vacuum by

cutting coal levies and by not imposing resource

taxes, he moves in, takes the cream in increas.ed

freight charges and then comes here and cnes

poor mouth.

The point is that the whole approach by the States and by this Federal Government to resources management is too ad hoc and allows for interstate rivalry and problems between Commonwealth and State. The Commonwealth is torn between ideological commitments to unrestrained, unrationalised development and the

Inter-Government Relations Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 149

Treasury knowledge that the whole situation is now out of hand. I can refer to the situation in Tasmania regarding p"l)Ner supply. A statutory authority, the Hydro t-l!jctric Commission, has opposed the elected government of the day, the State Government of Tasmania, and has promoted an alternative, more expensive hydroelectric'scheme that is environmentally damaging to the famous south west wilderness of Tasmania. If the Hydro Electric Commission has its way the State Government will have to come here and ask , for $1.3 billion, or a large percentage of it, for a scheme which will produce a miserly 340 megawatts of power and in the process will destroy Tasmania's last wild river, the Franklin.
I understand the Tasmanian Government's dilemma of how to promote a State's own development and employment and yet save the wilderness and provide future power. Coal could be the answer if Tasmania can buy it from New South Wales at the right price. The Australian Institute of Engineers' proposal for a $750m interstate power grid-it is cheap at the price-to 'service Tasmania, South Australia, Victoria and New South Wales would also solve the problem. Buthere is the rub-the State Electricity Commission of Victoria dismisses this concept. It .wants to build its own empire on Loy Yang power. Then it wants another Loy Yang-which will be funded by the Commonwealth to a great degree-to provide power for aluminium smelting at Portland. But it does not want to supply power to assist Tasmania.'
Where do we stand, as a Federal Parliament? Are we not the anchor that alone can force Australia to act as a nation and not as six or seven independent nation States? I am afraid that all we shall see from this Government is a squeeze on specific purpose grants as this fiasco proceeds. Already the amount for public housing has been reduced to $75m ih real terms, this financial year. How will the States provide the public housing needed in the Latrobe and Hunter valleys, at Gladstone and in Western Australia? Will they allow bank and building society interest rates to be dragged up further by semi-government authority loans which currently average 13.5 per cent? What is the future of the State hospital system? What will the Government tell the Premiers when they come here in April regarding the future of recurrent expenditure for State hospitals? Will this be in the interests of allowing further finance to be raised for the construction of power stations?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs) (5.l9)-in reply-For the record I need to say at this stage, as the debate closes, that we have been debating an amendment to the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Act 1976. I say that because there was very little relevance to that in the remarks of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West). However, I thank all honourable members who have contributed to this debate for indicating their support for the measure before the House. There is very little that I need to say at this stage. The Council for Inter-government Relations was set up following the 1976 legislation and it is therefore an initiative of this Government. The Council was established by the Government to help bring about a better relationship between the three spheres of government in Australia. I believe that although the Council is still in its infancy it has played a major role in helping to overcome many of the difficulties that exist between the three spheres of 'government.
I want to dismiss at once the assertion made by members of the Opposition that the present Government is not a friend of local government. Indeed, the decision of the Government to introduce tax sharing with local government-2 per cent of income tax now goes automatically to local government-has provided a financial shot in the arm to that section of government activity in Australia. That, together with the decision to establish the Advisory Council for Intergovernment Relations and a number of other measures that have been the initiative of this Government, signals the importance that it places on the local government sphere. I invite members of the Opposition who are in the House and who are not from New South Wales to look at what the New South Wales Government is doing at present in relation to local government. There is wholesale amalgamation taking place and, in short, the Labor Government in New South Wales is taking the word 'local' out of local government.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.

150 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Long Service LeaveAmendment Bill

LONG SERVICE LEAVE (COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES)
AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 4 December 1980, on motion by Mr Fife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill and the Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Bill 1980, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering both measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (5.24)-The purpose of the two Bills we are debating is to provide for the compulsory transfer of Commonwealth Teaching Service employees now working in the Northern Territory to the teaching service of the Northern Territory. From July 1979 the Northern Territory Government has been responsible for education in the Territory. However, the teachers have been employed by the Commonwealth Teaching Service. Except for the Commonwealth Teaching Service administration in the Northern Territory, the Northern Territory Government has met the cost of the teachers in the schools and it has powers to determine the education policy within the schools. It is now the wish of the Northern Territory Government that there should be a separate teaching service established in the Northern Territory and the employees now there as employees of the Commonwealth Teaching Service will be transferred to it. Following the establishment of the teaching service of the Northern Territory and the passage of this legislation, that transfer will take place. It is envisaged that some financial settlement in the Northern Territory Government's favour will be necessary to cover those costs which are now borne by the Commonwealth in relation to the administrative overheads associated with the Northern Territory operationspf the Commonwealth Teaching Service. As far as I know those financial arrangements are yet to be finalised.
The Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Bill provides for certain safeguards to ensure that the current employees of the Commonwealth Teaching Service will not be disadvantaged by the transfer. Before the transfer can take effect the

Minister for Education (Mr Fife) must be satisfied that the laws of. the Northern Territory preserve the rights of theritansferred employees in such matters as salaties/Llrecreation leave, sick leave and long service '<leave. However, if an officer claims to have been disadvantaged and if a special reappointments review committee supports the claim, the disadvantaged officer has a right to transfer back to the Commonwealth Teaching Service and a position would have to be found for him. The position of the officer would have to be maintained. As well as this, the transferred officers will retain the right to apply for Commonwealth Teaching Service positions as though they were still employees of the Commonwealth Teaching Service.
The Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Bill deals with long service leave not only for the transferred officers but also for others in the Northern Territory. At present, staff employed by authorities of the Northern Territory, other than the Northern Territory Public Service, derive long se.rvice leave entitlements from the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976. It has now been agreed that the staff of Northern Territory authorities should be covered by Northern Territory long service leave provisions. The amendments will ensure that the Commonwealth Teaching Service officers who are transferred to the teaching service of the Northern Territory will be subject to the Northern Territory long service leave provisions, which in turn must have benefits to employees at least as generous as those provided for Commonwealth employees. The Bill also provides that service with the teaching service of the Northern Territory will be recognised in any instance where an officer transfers to Commonwealth employment.
The Opposition does not oppose either of these two measures. I understand that they have the support of the Northern Territory Teachers Federation. Indeed, I understand that the legislation which is before the Northern Territory legislature is not being opposed by the Opposition there. However, I take the opportunity to make a few observations about the proposals. As yet we do not know the final shape ofthe teaching service of the Northern Territory as the Northern Territory Government has yet to legislate finally. I understand that that process has commenced and is likely to be completed fairly soon. Foi this reason the Bill before this House provides for the transfer to take place only when the Federal Minister is satisfied that the teaching service of the Northern Territory is providing adequate conditions and opportunities for the Commonwealth Teaching

Long Service Leave Amendment Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 151

Service transferees. This is obviously a sensible .approach. However, it,raises the question of when the transfer will take place. I would be grateful if the Minister, in his reply:to this debate, could inform us when that transfer date is likely to be finalised. The prospective date at the moment is, I understand, July 1981. However, there is some suggestion that it will be delayed until January 1982. Clearly, the Commonwealth Teaching Service officers are anxious to know but have been unable to get a commitment in relation to the date on which the transfer will take place. Both the Commonwealth Government and the Northern Territory government claim that the setting of the date for the transfer is up to the other. I hope that the Minister will be able to clarify the situation.
In' sponsoring the territorianisation of the teaching service, the Northern Territory Government is partly responding to, or encouraging, a bit of Northern Territory chauvinism but it is also partly seeking' to assume full control over its schools. It has substantial control now but, as has been said before, it is not the direct employer of the teachers who work in those schools. Whether this is necessary in ter:ms of the quality of education in the Northern Territory schools is debatable, but I suspect that it will not have much effect one way or the other. I would have thought that there was some merit in facilitating an easy transfer between the Northern Territory and other places where the Commonwealth Teaching Service operates, such as the Australian Capital Territory and Christmas Island. At the moment nearly 63 per cent of the Commonwealth Teaching Service employees are employed in the Australian Capital Territory and about 36 per cent of them are employed in the Northern Territory. Although there has been only a very small number of transfers between the two Territories in recent times, I think it is very desirable that arrangements be maintained to facilitate the easy transfer between the two Territories.
The Bill provides for transfer from the ptoposed teaching service of the Northern Territory to the Commonwealth Teaching Service. I suggest that the Minister should ensure that the legislation being passed by the Northern Territory Government should provide for similar reciprocal arrangements. I also think that the Minister ought to give some consideration to the future of the bilingual program. This was established as a result of a Commonwealth initia.tive in the days when the Commonwealth had direct responsibility for education in the Northern Territory. However, as a result of the control being passed to the Northern Territory in the last couple of years some problems seem to be e~erging. For instance, it has

been the practice for Aboriginal assistants who work in the schools in relation to the bilingual program to go to Batchelor College for part of their training. I understand that there are about 80 trainees at Batchelor College at anyone time.
One of the problems is that in recent times as the Aboriginal assistants have left the schools to complete or continue their training they have not been replaced. This has placed extra stress on the teachers and the Aboriginal assistants who remain in the schools. I ask the Minister to give consideration to how the Commonwealth can continue to have some oversight of the bilingual program because this deals not only with the question of education in the Northern Territory but also with matters which are very important to Aboriginal development. That is an area in which the Commonwealth ought to retain a very close commitment. Although there are already arrangements for the Commonwealth to participate, both through the Department of Education and the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, in relation to the operation of the bilingual program, I think that the Minister ought to ensure that thi sort of contact is continued after the transfer of the Commonwealth Teaching Service employees takes place.
There is very little else that one can add to these measures at this moment. As I have said, the Opposition does not oppose the Bills. I think it is important, however, to keep the operation of these procedures under close review because it is one thing to provide in legislation for safeguards to the transferred employees and it is another to see that those safeguards work in practice. The Northern Territory is a long way from Canberra and the people we are seeking to safeguard and who are likely to be disadvantaged are those in the Northern Territory who are being compulsorily transferred. It is important to ensure that the opportunities for them are rigorously kept under review so that they can take advantage of the provisions of this legislation.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (5.33)-Education is something in which all Territorians naturally have a very vital interest. It is something to which, naturally, all families are close. The proposed Northern Territory teaching service is of personal interest to about 3,000 government employees, including approximately 1,900 employees directly affected by the provisions of this legislation. The Northern Territory Government assumed responsibility for education on 1 July 1979. I think it is important to appreciate that the Bills we are considering relate to aspects of the teaching service and not to the education function which was transferred and which

152 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Long Service Leave Amendment Bill

had been operating successfully since that transfer.
When we look at the timing and priority given to this legislation it is easy for us to see that it has been very difficult for the Government to follow the transfer right through. Self-government was achieved in the Northern Territory in 1978 yet education as a function was not transferred until a year later. We are still debating and looking at the way in which the personnel of the Commonwealth Teaching Service are to be transferred. Maybe that is a comment on the fact that teachers are a peculiar breed. Maybe we should look very carefully at some of the reasons why it has taken so long for this remnant to be added to most ofthe State-like functions that have been transferred. Obviously there has been a need for a great deal of negotiation and consultation on this issue between the respective governments and their agencies, the Teachers Federation, other professionals and their interest groups, the parent organisations and various industry and commerce groups that are vitally affected by the resulting graduates from the schools and, of course, many private individuals who have taken a close interest in this matter.
The provisions of the legislation provide for and facilitate the transition from the Commonwealth Teaching Service to a separate independent Northern Territory Teaching Service. They seek to preserve the rights and entitlements of those people affected. Complementary legislation which has been introduced in the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly-I understand it was debated yesterday-creates the Northern Territory Teaching Service. It provides for an independent commissioner who will have various functions and responsibilities. It seeks to protect the teachers' rights and interests.
I believe that the various details have beel) well canvassed. If we look at the peculiar situation of the Northern Territory I think that we should take into consideration the fact that this is the last of the major functions which are to go across to the Northern Territory Government. I was interested in some of the comments made by the previous speaker, the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). He seemed to take the rather quaint attitude that paternalism should be maintained by the Federal Government in a number of areas. I believe that the.remote control of education services-that has been the position for so long-has made it difficult for this transfer to happen. Education as a function in the Northern Territory has been very successful. It has been administered by the Northern Territory Government in most recent times, by Commonwealth agencies since 1972 and previously by many other

groups and agencies. My own family involvement

with back

education in the to 1924 when my

fN~othrethrewrnenTt etorritthoeryTegroreis-

tory as a pioneer itiner~~t teacher. He rode a

pushbike from Darwin to Katherine. Over the

years I have become very familiar with the un-

usual and peculiar needs of education in the

Northern Territory.

If we look at the situation today, it is important to recognise that the clients are some 30,000 students in Territory institutions. Of those students, 22,000 are enrolled in urban schools and the further 8,000 are enrolled in predominantly Aboriginal community schools. As I mentioned in my opening remarks, the number of staff employed is approximately 3,000, 1,900 of whom are employed by the Commonwealth Teaching Service. More than 2,500 of the administrative and teaching staff in the Territory are actually engaged in duties in the classroom and in the schools. Approximately 450 staff are engaged in various office, professional and support capacities. The number of schools in the Northern Terri-
tory naturally has grown over the years to the stage today where there are approximately 140. Again if we look at the detailed statistics we find there are 53 schools in the general urban situation, some 74 schools in predominantly Aboriginal communities and a further 13 institutions serving different needs throughout the Northern Territory.

The honourable member for Fremantle referred to some problems with regard to Aboriginal education. Let us not delude ourselves; there will, of course, be problems. But I-believe the education services in the NorthernT~rritory are now meeting the peculiar and particular needs of the Aboriginal population. The Federal Government has been most innovative in the way in which it
has stimulated and created many of the programs for these services. I do not share the fears of the honourable member for Fremantle with regard to the bilingual program. I believe that the Northern Territory Government is well aware of the problems in this area and is responding to them very well. Mention was made of the teacher training program at Batchelor. The honourable member for Fremantle seemed to raise this as the major issue. i think he said that 80 teacher trainees had been extricated but were not replaced in classroom situations. I believe that 72 students at Batchelor this year have been drawn from Aboriginal communities but only 36 of them have come from the classroom situation. The others have come from various organisations in Aboriginal
communities. Those 36 students have been placed
on study programs at Batchelor and are receiving

Long Service Leave Amendment Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 153

full pay. Naturally this makes it difficult for any government agency to pick up and fund a replacement program in the:s,chools. Just as study leave applies to every otMr 60mmunity and every other school it is up to thos~ 'sbhools to make the natural covering arrangements.
I believe that, in the Northern Territory, this legislation has been under intensive examination by the community for at least 12 months and before that it was before the community for some six or eight months. The Minister for Education in the Northern Territory has canvassed the issues widely. I believe he has had a good, clear and positive response to all of the proposals. The Australian Labor Party in the Northern Territory has supported the new Teaching Service. If it had not been for the last Federal election, I am sure this matter would have been concluded a lot sooner. However, I appreciate that parliamentary timetables on issues such as this do get disrupted. The issue of education is most important. I trust that these Bills will be passed as quickly as possible so that they can be implemented at an early date.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (5.43)-1 join my colleagues in supporting this Bill. I welcome its introduction, belated though it is. I rejoice on behaif of the people involved in education in the Northern Territory and the Commonwealth Teaching Service that we are about to pass this legislation. I refer briefly to the relationship between the Commonwealth Teaching Service which now provides teachers for the education system in the Australian Capital Territory and the proposed Northern Territory Teaching Service. Traditionally there has been a substantial interchange of teachers between the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory. I hope that that interchange will continue to take place because I think it would be to the benefit of both teaching services. I know that many of our finest teachers in the Australian Capital Territory have served in the Northern Territory, in Darwin in particular, or have served in Aboriginal schools. Some of those teachers come here for a stint and then go back to the Northern Territory to carryon their work. Both teaching services are relatively small and it is important, certainly from the points of view of the teachers and the pupils, that they continue to work closely to provide sufficient scope of opportunity for teachers compared with the much wider opportunities available in a State teaching service. Because they are very small teaching services compared with the State teaching services, I think it is necessary for them to work very closely together to provide greater opportunities for teachers and, of course, students.

I think there is no question that a high degree of cross-fertilisation between the Commonwealth Teaching Service in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory Teaching Service is desirable. Of course, this Bill should facilitate that movement. The honourable member for the Northern Territory (Mr Tambling) referred to the paternalistic attitude taken by my colleague, tl;1e honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). I do not think that was intended at all. Rather I think he was concerned about the need for co-operation between the teaching service in the Australian Capital Territory, which happens to be the national capital, and a more remote service in the Northern Territory. As I say, both services will benefit if there is continual cross-fertilisation.
I think I should comment on some matters in respect of which problems may arise. Of course, the main object of the Bill is to provide that employees are qot disadvantaged by compulsory transfer. In previous cases of compulsory transfer of Commonwealth employees, the Public Service Act has been amended to provide for the rights of the public servant to be preserved. However, fairly recently iny office has been informed of cases in which public servants have experienced great difficulty following their transfer to the Northern Territory Public Service. Although on paper their rights are theoretically guaranteed, in practice it does not always work out that way. For instance, sometimes the public servants do not get the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette until it is too late if they are out in some remote area. As I say, in theory the opportunities are there. But in fact, quite often it is very difficult and sometimes impossible for them to apply for a job and expect to get an interview in Canberra if they happen to be up in the Northern Territory. So what we see on paper does not necessarily mean that the rights of the employee are in fact protected.
I believe that a re-appointments review committee is to be set up to safeguard the rights of members of the teaching service in the Northern Territory. I hope that this works out. I hope that in these sorts of cases the Government will accept the decisions of the boards that it sets up for the purpose of review. Of course, the Government's record in accepting the decision of the umpire has not been terribly good. I hope that the mechanics which have been set up by this Bill do ensure equitable treatment because if a Commonwealth employee does feel that he is disadvantaged it is very difficult to prove that disadvantage when he does not have the sympathy and support of the Government.

154 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Long Service Leave Amendment lJill

The Minister for Education (Mr Fife) in his second reading speech said:
I believe that the Commonwealth Teaching Service has made a significant contribution to the development of education in the Northern Territory since its inception in 1972.
I would not question that at all. The Commonwealth Teaching Service has made a magnificent contribution here in Canberra. In many ways I think it was responsible for the very fine standards we achieved when we first set up the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority. However, recent experience in the Australian Capital Territory indicates that there has been a decline in the standard of education provided by the Government. This is not the fault of the teachers. The teachers have consistently attempted to maintain high professional levels of efficiency and dedication. The problem, of course, has been staff ceilings. I know that the Minister for Education, who is at the table, is not unsympathetic to the Schools Authority in respect of the problems of education in Canberra. The fact remains' that under the staffing formula we should have 2;820 teachers. But the Government has set a staff ceiling of2,760 teachers which is below the requirement of its own staffing formula.
I say without equivocation that the Government has reneged on the undertaking given to the people of the Australian Capital Territory by Senator Carrick, the former Minister for Education. I hope that the present Minister will go in to bat and try to restore this situation so that the Government is made to adhere to the undertaking that it gave to the people of Canberra. There is a shortfall of something like 60 teaching positions in the Australian Capital Territory. I am talking about the Australian Capital Territory because its teaching problems are closely related to those of the Northern Territory. The two systems need to be interchangeable. Teachers need to be able to move freely from one system to the other. Almost all of our schools now have some hardships. There are overcrowded classes, teachers are being asked to perform extra duties outside their fields and children of different age groups are being put into the same classes. The trouble is that when pressure is put on staffing, the people who are affected are the very people who need the most attention and who are most in need of education. I refer to people who require special education, people in the remedial areas who need help in reading, speaking and mathematics.
There are grave teacher shortages even in our schools for the physically handicapped. I understand that Cranleigh school is short two full-time teachers. This situation has arisen because the Government has reneged on its undertaking to

provide teachers in accordance with an agreed formula. Unfortunately the people who are most in need of special educal~bnare the ones who suffer when there is a shortage. Migrant children or children of non-EnglisWspeaking parents particularly suffer in schools where there are just not enough teachers for special or remedial teaching. Although full-time teachers are needed, sometimes schools get 0.4 of a teacher or a teacher for four hours a week. The teachers know that there are children in classes who are not being taught correctly, they know they are not learning and they know they are in need of remedial teaching. However, the teachers cannot do anything about it. Quite often in this situation children in primary schools become labelled as failures as early as in third class. These children sit at the back of the class, they get behind and they never catch up.
I think it is a very sad indictment of our system when the very people who need extra teaching are not getting it. This is particularly the case in Canberra where the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority started off being a bit ahead of education systems in other parts of Australia. We were innovative, we were seen to be pacesetting. Now we have slipped behind and our system is no better or worse than any other. We are not saying we should be better. But we are saying that all the systems should be better. Teachers who have the skills required to overcome the difficulties should not be prevented from carrying out their professional work because schools are understaffed. That is the situation in Canberra today. I do not know what the situation in the Northern Territory is in relation to staff ceilings. But I hope that the teachers of the Northern Territory do not allow the Government to downgrade the standards as has happened in the Australian Capital Territory.
The Commonwealth Teaching Service needs to be large enough to meet the educational needs of children for whom the Government has responsibility. As I have said, the teaching of English as a second language is particularly important and this is one of the areas in Canberra in which migrant children are being seriously disadvantaged. I understand that under this legislation, Northern Territory teachers seeking to transfer back to the Commonwealth Teaching Service in .the Australian Capital Territory under the provisions of the Bill will have few prospects under the present Government's policies simply because positions are not available although work needs to be done here. There are quite a few unemployed teachers in the Australian Capital Territory. It is quite difficult to get a job as a teacher in Canberra regardless of the needs of the schools and children.

Long Service Leave Amendment Bill

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 155

Staff ceilings are imposed in an arbitary fashion
with no regard to teachi,ng needs or the shortfall in
the teaching staff in t4~ Territory overall. These deficiencies have be~q"well recognised by educators and professional people in the Australian Capital Territory.

royal assent, then the Commonwealth is in a position to transfer personnel as soon as the administrative arrangements have been made in the Northern Territory.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

The text of a letter which Senator Knight, a Government senator, wrote to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) asking him to honour his Government's commitment to education in the Australian Capital Territory was released in the Press today. So this is not just a partisan appeal. It is quite non-partisan and goes right across the board. The Government is not honouring its commitment and we call upon it to do so. For the last five years the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority has not received increased resources in conformity with its needs. There is an immediate need for more staff, more remedial staff, more training, more reductions in school fees, more career counselling and more administrative funds. We see the transfer of teachers to the Northern Territory Teaching Service as a major step in the development of education in that Territory and we wish the Service well.
The Federal Government has a responsibility to ensure that this Teaching Service for which it retains responsibility is improved. I know that teachers in the Northern Territory will regard it as their responsibility, as have the teachers here in Canberra, to see that the Government does not allow standards to be cut back in any way. I repeat that if standards are falling in the Australian Capital Territory this will have a spin-off in the Northern Territory and vice versa as the two services are closely interrelated. I hope that that close relationship will continue because it will be for the benefit of both services.

In Committee
The Bill.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs) (5.58)-1 move:
After clause 3, page I, insert the following new clause:
"3A. After section 9 of the Principal Act the following section is inserted:
Delegations by Presiding Officers
'9A. (I) The President or the Speaker or the President and the Speaker, as the, case may be, may, either generally or as otherwise provided by the instrument of delegation, by writing signed by him or them, as the case may be, delegate to an officer or employee of the Parliament, any of his or their powers, as the case may be, as an approving authority under this Act or under the regulations, other than this power of delegation.
'(2) A power delegated under sub-section (I), when exercised by the delegate, shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have been exercised by the President or the Speaker or the PresideI1t and the Speaker, as the case may be.
'( 3) A delegation under sub-section (I) does not prevent the exercise by the President or the Speaker or the President and the Speaker, as the case may be, of the power to which the delegation relatd.
'(4) In sub-section (1)-
(a) the reference to officers of the Parliament shall be read as a reference to officers of the Department of the Senate, the Department of the' House of Representatives, the Department of the Parliamentary Library, the Department of the Parliamentary Reporting Staff or the Joint House Department; and
(b) the reference to employees of the Parliament shall be read as a reference to employees, within the meaning of the Public Service Act 1922, performing duti~, in a Department specified in paragraph (a), ..

Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal
Affairs) (5.57)-in reply-The honourable
member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) asked during his speech whether I could indicate when the
transfer of Commonwealth Teaching Service per-
sonnel would take place. I am unable to do that. I
understand that initially it was intended to make
the transfer during July but that probably the
Northern Territory administration will not be ready by that date. I am advised also that the'
Northern Territory wishes to transfer as early as
possible. I reiterate that in relation to administra-
tion it is largely a matter for the Territory to make its own arrangements. Once the legislation has
been passed by this Parliament and it receives

The Presiding Officers of Parliament have requested that an amendment be made to the
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Em-
ployees) Act 1978 to allow them to delegate their
powers under that Act. These powers relate to the granting of long service leave or the authorising of
payments in lieu of long service leave to officers
and employees of the Parliamentary Depart-
ments. At present the Act permits only the Presid-
ing Officers to exercise those powers. On the other hand, the Public Service Board has a power of del-
egation under the Act to grant long service leave
and payments in lieu of leave to staff employed in
the departments of State. This amendment will give the Presiding Officers the same power of del-
egation in respect of long service leave as they

156 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Federal Proceedings (Costs) Bill

already have in relation to other conditions of employment of staff in parliamentary departments by virtue of section 9 of the Public Service Act.
Amendment agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with an amendment; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife)-by leave-read a third time.
COMMONWEALTH TEACHING SERVICE AMENDMENT BILL 1980
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 4 December 1980, on motion by Mr Fife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
Sitting suspended from 6.1 to 8 p.m.
FEDERAL PROCEEDINGS (COSTS) BILL 1980
Consideration resumed from 4 December 1980.
Second Reading
Mr VINER (Stirling:--Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (8.0)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide, in respect of federal and certain territorial courts, reimbursement to litigants of a similar kind to that provided in the States under State suitors' fund legislation and similar laws. In each of the States there is now legislation providing for reimbursement to a litigant who, through no fault of his own, has to bear the costs of an appeal from a decision involving an error of law or an incorrect assessment of the quantum of damages, or the cost of a new trial. The State legislation is, however, restricted to proceedings in State courts and to appeals to the High Court of Australia and the Privy Council from State courts. No such provision is made in respect of proceedings in federal or territory courts, or appeals from these courts. This Bill provides for the case where a decision of a federal or territory court, other than a Northern Territory or Norfolk Island court, is reversed on a question of law, or on the assessment of damages, or a new trial is ordered in such a court. In the family law

area, it also extends to appeals to the Family

Court of Australia from State courts and the

courts of the Northern 'Territory and Norfolk

Island exercising jurisdiCtibn under the Family

Law Act.

.. . I,,'

Under the terms of the Bill certain persons will,
in specified circumstances, be eligible for reim-
bursement of all or part of their costs. Firstly, an unsuccessful respondent to an appeal which is successful on a question of law or as to the
amount of damages awarded may be reimbursed
with respect to the costs of the appeal. Secondly, a
party to an action from which an appeal is successful on a question of law and in which 'a new
trial is ordered may be reimbursed with respect to
the costs ofthe new trial. Thirdly, an accused per-
son whose appeal against conviction upon indictment is successful on a question oflaw and who is
ordered to stand for a new trial may be reim-
bursed with respect to the costs of the new trial.
Fourthly, a party to civil or criminal proceedings
which are aborted because a judge or magistrate
involved dies or becomes, for whatever reason, unable to continue with, or give judgment in, the
proceedings may be reimbursed with respect to
the costs of those proceedings. Likewise, where proceedings are discontinued and new proceed-
ings ordered through no fault of a party to those
proceedings, that party may be reimbursed with
respect to the cost of those proceedings. Fifthly, a
successful appellant may in certain circumstances be reimbursed in respect of his costs. This may
occur where costs are awarded against a respon-
dent who is unable to payor who cannot be found or, in the family law jurisdiction, where the courts
are not empowered to award costs.

If a person comes within one of those categories, he may apply to the court which heard the appeal or the court in which the proceedings
were aborted or discontinued for a costs cer-
tificate. A costs certificate is a c~rtificate stating
that, in the opinion of the court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise
the payment of part or all of the taxed costs of that person. Whether or not such a certificate is to
be granted is left, subject to one exception which I
shall mention shortly, entirely to the discretion of the courts, and it is proper that it should be. Over
the years, in considering similar applications
under the legislation of the various States, the
courts have developed guidelines which they apply. No appeal lies from the refusal of a court
to grant a certificate. The one exception is con-
tained in clause 14. Consistently with the practice under the State schemes, a court may not grant a
costs certificate to the Commonwealth, a State or
the Northern Territory or to a large company.

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES. 157

A person who has been granted a costs cer-

GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S SPEECH

tificate may apply to thy Attorney-General for reimbursement of his cJlts in accordance with the
legislation. The AttC!(J}J!JftGeneral may not authorise the payment of any amount unless the costs in respect of which the certificate was given have either been specifically fixed by the court, determined by taxation or otherwise in accordance

Address-in-Reply
Debate resumed from 4 December 1980, on motion by Mr Spender:
That the following Address-in-Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Governor-General be agreed to:
May it please Your Excellency:

with the rules of the court or regulations under the Bill or determined by agreement between the person and the Attorney-General. Nor may the
Attorney-General authorise, in respect of a costs

We, the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled, desire to express our loyalty to Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to thank Your Excellency for the Speech which you have been pleased to ad-
dress to Parliament.

certificate granted by a court, payment of an amount greater than the maximum amount specified in respect of that court. Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the maximum amount in re-
spect of a court is such amount as is specified in the Schedule to the Bill or such larger amount as is specified in regulations under the Bill, in respect
of that court. It should be noted that, in the case

Upon which Mr Kent had moved by way of amendment:
That the following words be added to the Address: " but note that the Government:
(I) has failed to adequately respond to- (a) record unemployment; (b) a high and worsening level of inflation; (c) reduced and falling family living standards, and

ofa costs certificate granted to a person by a court

(d) the highest taxation burden in the nation's

at the end of a succession of appeals in the same matter, the maximum amount payable applies in
respect of all the relevant costs incurred by that person in the series of appeals to which the Bill

history;
(2) allows unsatisfactory administration of foreign investment guidelines which permit an uncritical and opendoor policy to the takeover of Australian industry and resources to continue, and

applies. The maximum amounts fixed by the Bill are in line with those fixed by the various State schemes. Further, the Attorney-General may not
authorise a payment pursuant to a costs cer-

(3) makes no long-term provision for assistance to manufacturing industry and farming industries, which are likely to be severely disadvantaged as a result of successive exchange rate revaluations and substantially increased imports in the context of resourceS

tificate if that costs certificate has been or is likely

development'.

to be vacated. A certificate will be vacated if the Mr BURR (Wilmot) (8.7)-On 25 November person to whom the certificate is granted sub1980 the Governor-General officially opened the sequently appeals successfully in the same action. Thirty-second Parliament. I wonder how many of

us who participated in that ceremony reflected on

Payments under the Bill are to be made out of moneys appropriated by the Parliament for the purpose. This follows the Victorian precedent,
rather than that of the other States where the suitors' fund or like fund is financed by a levy on court fees. It is not expected that very large amounts of money will be involved, so that it is administratively simpler and less costly for the scheme to be financed directly out of Consolidated Revenue. This is a small but important measure of reform which reflects the growing significance of the federal and territory courts. Hitherto, ex gratia payments have been made in cases where, under State law, payments would have

the significance of the institution that collectively we now form; or was it that some of us were more concerned to celebrate an election victory while others contemplated how they could win power next time? Unfortunately, in his Speech His Excellency made no reference to parliamentary reform, but it must be accepted that not all subjects can be covered in that Speech. In my view, it is
high time we all gave serious consideration to the . role 9f Parliament, the relationship between Parliament and government, the relationship between Parliament and political parties, and the part that we as members could and should be playing.

been made in respect of proceedings in State It is worth while to remember briefly that our

courts. With the growing volume and importance Parliament was adopted from Westminster. The

of litigation in federal and territory courts, it is British Parliament evolved over hundreds of

proper that these payments should have a statuyears. Its main purpose was to take power away

tory basis. I commend the Bill to the House.

from an entrenched executive based around the

monarch and give that power to the people

through their elected members. Because there was

Debate (on motion by Mr Lionel Bowen) an ever present competition for power between

adjourned.

the Executive and Parliament, there wereoften

158 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

clashes and wrangles but, as time went by, Parliament gained the ascendancy because it represented the people. If our Parliament then is to be carried with any relevance into the twentyfirst century, it is essential that Parliament establish at least equality with the Executive. It is true that Parliament has such power, but rarely in modern partisan politics is it used. It is assumed widely amongst the public that Parliament exists only in order to support an executive government and to test the metal of other people who might wish to form the government. Nowhere in the community is there a widespread belief that Parliament acts in the public interest as a buffer against unrestrained executive power. Such scepticism amongst the public is understandable because toall intents and purposes it is true.
Our founding fathers established independence on the basis that power would be divided between the executive, the legislature and the judiciary. It was not assumed that one part of that tripartition would completely dominate the other; nor was it assumed that elections would be held in every constituency throughout the country for the sole purpose of filling the Cabinet room. Parliament can and should represent the aspirations and interests of people throughout the country. However, because of modern political trends, Parliament now represents only political parties or governments and oppositions. Parliament is dominated by the all pervading party political interests and by the selfish ambition to have and to exercise power. However, if Parliament is to be relevant, it must establish its independence and autonomy.
I have put forward a number of suggestions that are designed to give Parliament independence from the executive and allow it properly to review policy proposals. I have suggested that all Ministers be appointed from the House of Representatives. That is not designed to allow more colleagues in this place to be appointed to the ministry, but rather to allow the Senate more thoroughly to scrutinise Government proposals. It seems incongruous that the Senate is expected to be a House of review while at the same time some of its members form part of the Executive Government. In reality, the Senate is not a proper House of review but rather an extension of the House of government and equally dominated by party allegiances. Surely the Senate could better fill its review role if none of its members were Ministers and there was no ambition on the part of others to become Ministers.

I have suggested also that there should be a oneline appropriation in the annual Budget for Parliament and that its expehditure should be controlled by the Presiding' Officers. Parliament cannot properly scrutinise the Executive while the funding of parliamentary operations is controlled by the Executive. It would be a simple matter for the Government to say that a select committee cannot be established because no money is available. If the members wish to cut back expenditure on, say, the dining room in order to scrutinise more government operations, we should be able to do so without requiring approval from the Minister for Finance. I have suggested also that the term of parliaments be extended to four years and I am greatly attracted to the suggestion of fixed term parliaments:
Mr Armitage-Would you be prepared to support that on that understanding?
Mr BURR-If the honourable member waits he will hear what else I have to say, There is a widespread view amongst the public that once a government is elected it should concentrate on governing without the diversion of unnecessary elections. By fixing the term of parliaments an entrenched government cannot use the electoral system for its own expediency. Whilst a government may claim that that removes certain options that are presently available to it, in reality it means that a government cannot manipulate election dates in order to give it an advantage over its opponents. Democracy will work only when political parties and interested groups are able to put their policies to the people on a fair and equal basis so that the people may judge which policies they wish to pursue for the period of the forthcoming parliament. When one political party is given an advantage over another political party by manipulating election dates or by a gerrymander of electoral boundaries, public confidence is undermined and democracy is placed at risk. If we can remove the fear of that manipulation we will do much to restore public confidence in the Parliament.
Despite all that I have said, the most important factor is for members to exercise a judgment that reflects the views of their constituents rather than have decisions forced on them by the political parties they represent. The Australian Labor Party is probably more strongly disciplined than my party. Often decisions are made by the party members who have not faced the electorate and, unfortunately, Labor members of parliament are then compelled to ignore their constituents and to vote with the party decision. The Liberal Party of Australia maintains that elected members are free to make their own judgment. However, the reality

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 159

is vastly different. If a member steps out of line or rocks the boat in any \yay, he can be subjected to the most intense pr~~llre, from both the parliamentary executive and~h!{ party organisation. On the other hand, memgers who passively toe the line often are rewarded with overseas trips or junior portfolios.
Rank and file members of the Liberal Party complain that the Public Service has too much power and influence, yet the discipline that they, through their organisation, exert entrenches the Public Service power. If a member suggests that a department is inefficient or that a matter of government operation should be scrutinised, he is accused of disloyalty to the Minister, to the government and to his party, with a covert threat to withdraw endorsement.
Mr Armitage-Does this happen in your party room?
Mr BURR-It certainly happens in the honourable member's party room, too. He should remember what happened to the former honourable member for Banks. Such a suggestion probably would lead to the dismissal of that member from Parliament, as it did with the former honourable member for Banks. Because of that the Public Service is not properly scrutinised and, therefore, its power is ensured.
Unfortunately, many people in the political parties believe the interest of the party outweighs concern for the Parliament or the electorate. The public at large is losing confidence in the Parliament because their elected members are not able properly to represent the people. Parliament belongs to the whole population; it is not the plaything of an entrenched executive or political parties, We as its members have the responsibility to ensure that Parliament fulfils the role expected of it by the community. The question then must be: What can we as members do to fulfil community expectations? Decisions made by the Government are usually made on the advice of Public Service departments or on expert advice that is marshalled by the Public Service. As private members, we do not have such advice available, nor do we have the facilities to marshall expert advice. However, official committees of the Parliament have secretarial staff and can call on expert advice either from within the Public Service or from other areas of occupation.
It would seem then that if we are to fulfil the role expected of us by the community, it must be done through an extension of the present parliamentary committees. I am not fully familiar with the Senate's procedures, but it would appear that

it has a much more extensive system of committees than the House of Representatives. During the previous Parliament the House experimented with legislation committees and Estimates committees. These developments are encouraging and I understand they were introduced with the Government's approval. However, much more needs to be done. At present we have only three effective committees that can properly scrutinise government decisions: The Joint Committee of Public Accounts, the Standing Committee on Public Works and the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. More recently, we have been experimenting with a further Estimates committee.
The Estimates committees of the Parliament can look briefly into the operations of each department after the presentation of the Budget, but their time for debate and scrutiny is usually limited to about two hours. What is needed is a system that will allow committees of the Parliament to investigate workings of government departments at any time and also constantly to monitor the effectiveness of previous policy decisions. If a past policy decision is proven to be wrong by subsequent experience, it can be scrutinised only by the government or the Public Service. There is little opportunity for the Parliament to review past decisions unless those matters are formally reintroduced into the House by the government. That has happened on occasions, but usually only after intense pressure by the media. It is that media exposure of the weakness in the parliamentary process that is causing a loss of public confidence in the Parliament. We have it in our own hands to correct that anomaly, to establish committees that will properly scrutinise proposed government action and review past decisions. Such committees also should be available to receive a point of view from interested groups and members of the public. No doubt, that would help to bridge the communication gap between the community and the Parliament and would help to restore public confidence in the Parliament.
We need parliamentary committees with members from both sides of the House that are appointed to review the processes of each government department. They should review the departmental Budget estimates but they should review also the effectiveness of existing policy operation as well as proposed new policies. These investigations should be conducted at any time considered appropriate by the committee and they also should call on expert advice from either inside or outside the Public Service. If each committee were limited to one or two related departments, it would allow members to build up

160 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

expertise and knowledge in those matters. Because I consider such work to be central to the purpose for which Parliament is established, every member of the House should serve on at least one such committee.
Because of the fierce division between the political parties, Opposition members effectively are only able to oppose decisions made by the Government and refine their policies in the hope of winning government at some time in the future. Whilst I am not suggesting that Opposition members should be invited to join the Executive Government, they should have more opportunity to influence the attitude of Parliament. Involvement in bipartisan parliamentary committees would allow Opposition members more opportunity to make an input on behalf of their constituents. In any election about 45 per cent of the people will support the Opposition party and the philosophy it represents. It is unrealistic to assume that because the Opposition party regardless of its political persuasion has not won government it should be denied an influential role in the Parliament. Effectively, that means that 45 per cent of the people are disenfranchised. Participation in the committees I have suggested would give Opposition members more involvement and provide them with more opportunity to put forward the views of their supporters.
Parliament is a magnificent institution. It has been developed and refined over hundreds of years and has now been adopted by the free world as the central pillar of democracy. It is Parliament that preserves all the tenets of freedom for the people and prevents the development of totalitarian regimes. If we are to preserve freedom and democracy in this country for future generations, we must preserve the Parliament. That requires us to ensure that Parliament serves the purpose the community expects of it. If we fail in that task, public confidence will be undermined and the Parliament discredited. Parliament then could be considered redundant and swept aside by anarchists intent on establishing a totalitarian regime. We must show that Parliament is a vibrant institution in its own right, which the public expects, well capable of reflecting the views and aspirations of the community. That requires the most earnest endeavour from all of us to uphold the Parliament and not be distracted by the temptations, ambitions and pressures that constantly confront us.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (8.23)-Whilst I agree with a great deal of what the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) said, he is obviously suffering from the frustrations of being a

backbench member of the Government. He is obviously concerned about the system of dictatorship which operates within the party rooms of the Government parties. For example, he said tonight that if a Government supporter toes the line-I think they were the words he used-he is rewarded with a junior ministerial position or a trip overseas. But if he does not toe the line he gets nothing. That is an extraordinary admission of what is occurring under the dictatorship of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). The honourable member for Wilmot has now left the House. He does not want to hear my answer to what he said.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I ask the honourable member to choose his words without reflecting necessarily on any member of the House.
Mr ARMITAGE-I am not reflecting upon the honourable member. I am reflecting upon his obvious frustration with the system operating within his own party. On the contrary, I sympathise with him. I am very sympathetic to his problem. I am trying to outline it a little more. In no circumstances would I suggest that he is hypocritical in any way but I refer to the fact that he was elected to the Parliament in 1975. He advocates a fixed term for the Parliament and an extension of the current term to, say, four years. I agree with the proposal for a fixed term for the Parliament on one understanding, that is, that the Senate would have no right to withdraw Supply from the elected government or, in other words, from the party or the coalition parties which had the majority in the House of Representatives. I assume that the honourable member was speaking of a fixed term for the House of Representatives. I think that, on that basis, all my colleagues on this side of the House would agree with such a proposition.
I feel that we have received tonight an insight into the frustrations and problems which exist within the Government parties. We heard a few only yesterday. However, we are speaking tonight on the Address-in-Reply to the GovernorGeneral's Speech. I refer to the part of the Speech which dealt with unemployment and youth. Of course, we recognise that, whilst the Speech was formally the Governor-General's Speech, it was prepared by the Government for him. There were some criticisms that it contained undertones of politics which we have not heard for many a year. I do not blame the Governor-General for that in any way whatsoever. I make that quite clear. I can blame only the Government and, in particular, the Prime Minister. Under the heading 'Unemployment and Youth' the Speech stated:

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 161

The first element of that program to which I wish,to draw particular attention is the provision it contains for overcoming unemployment in general and particularly for stimulating the employment of youth. This is placed first because of the great importance my Government attaches to it.
In recent years, and for a numb~r of reasons, the question of jobs for young people has emerged as a crucial one-
I am glad that at last the Government has woken up to that----:
not only in Australia but in virtually all Western countries. It is not only an economic problem but a social one. Indeed, for the young people involved and their families it is a major psychological and human problem.
That was said by the Governor-General. In other words, it was spoken by the Prime Minister himself. Yet, only a matter of months after making that statement, the Prime Minister came out with the proposition that the unemployment benefit should be removed for all young people aged 16 and 17 years. In his view they should be told that they either are to be looked after by their own families or sent back to school. He is passing the buck back' to the family for this Government's misdoings and economic policies which have caused massive youth unemployment. I will give some'statistics for my own area in a few moments. The Prime Minister is endeavouring to pass the buck to the family or to the States to bear the cost of educating young people to the age of 18 years.
The Prime Minister has not been out into the areas of mass youth unemployment. I invite him to come to the outer western suburbs of Sydney to see it. I invite him to get to understand the psychology of these young people and their hopelessness instead' of standing in his ivory tower and preaching these ridiculous policies. I suggest that, if young people continue at school to the age of 18 years, their chances of employment are far worse than they would be if they left school at 16 years of age. One could ask any employer. To start with, he wants a person with work experience. Furthermore, if he has to choose between a person of 16 or 17 years of age and a person of 18 years of age he will employ the younger person who has just left school because he can pay him at a lower rate. It is financial common sense, but we would not find the Prime Minister understanding that economic proposition. Therefore, I would never advise a young person, unless he were undertaking university training and was capable of handling it, to leave school at a late age. I would advise that young person in New South Wales, for instance, to obtain the School Certificate and then set to, if possible, and get a trade qualification, obtain employment and acquire work experience. Once on that road, young people have the opportunity to improve themselves as they go along.

I should like to quote some figures concerning unemployment in the outer western suburbs of Sydney. First, I refer to the youth unemployment figures for Blacktown, as supplied by the Commonwealth Employment Service, for December, 1980. I do not have the January figures which came out only yesterday. They are a little difficult to obtain these days but I understand that they show a serious deterioration from the position of last year, despite the fact that in the last fortnight the Government has been claiming a big improvement in employment. As at the end of December 1980, 1,574 young people were registered as being unemployed, compared with 1,593 as at December 1979, a reduction of only 19. Let us keep in mind that the latest figures show massive increases compared with the figures for the same time last year. For Mount Druitt and St Marys combined, the number of unemployed young people stood at 2,341 in December 1980 compared with 2,400 in December 1979, a reduction of only 59. A great deal has been said by the Government about the improvement in .the number of unfilled vacancies. As at December 1980 eight vacancies were registered in Blacktown and 1,574 young people were unemployed.
Mr Barry Jones-It is like the position in my ele,ctorate and it is the same sort of area too.
Mr ARMITAGE-I would agree with the honourable member. As at December 1979 seven vacancies were registered and 1,593 young people were unemployed. In other words the number of vacancies has increased by one-from seven to eight. This is the massive improvement that the Government has been bragging about. For Mount Druitt and St Marys combined job vacancies stood at 39 at the end of December 1980 compared with 28 in December 1979, an improvement of 11. Let us keep in mind that although there were 39 vacancies, 2,341 young people were unemployed and that although in December 1979 28 vacancies existed 2,400 young people were unemployed. This is an indictment of any government. In the whole region of Blacktown, St Marys and Mount Druitt a total of 7,478 young people and adults are unemployed. That is the situation, yet the Prime Minister is proposing that no young people who are 16 or 17 years of age should receive the unemployment benefit-that either the families should look after them or they should go back to school. That would mean that they would leave school at the age of 18 years and find it harder than ever to obtain a job. These, young people would not have gained work experience and an employer would naturally prefer someone younger with such experience rather than pay the higher award rate. It is time the Prime Minister,

162 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

instead of sitting in his ivory tower, visited areas. q()'YHrnment was in office, we asked the Snowy

such as the outer western suburbs of Sydney.

MqIJptains Engineering Corporation to undertake

Mr Barry Jones-And of Melbourne.
Mr ARMITAGE-I agree with the hon9urable member. The Prime Minister should speak to these young people and find just how things work, instead of calling them all dole bludgers. Of course, there are problem children. That is not new; it occurs in every generation. Kids are basically the same as they have always been. A kid who leaves school and cannot get a job may run into one of his or her mates from the same class who has a job. That young person will say that he or she has a job. It is only natural that, from al) inborn sense of self-protection the other kid will say, 'You are a mug, mate; I am on the dole. You have to work.' This is only a natural reaction. Out of that sort of situation is born the dole bludger psy- .chology. In actual fact, that is the way in which the young person is trying to protect his or her self-respect. That is not understood unless one speaks to these people and understands their psychology and problems. It is well and truly time that this Government realised that much more needs to be done in the training of our young people. For far too many years-there has been error on all sides-we have concentrated purely upon the universities and the colleges of advanced education. Basically, as a nation, for far too many years we have neglected our tertiary and technical training.
It is time that our whole apprenticeship system was reviewed completely. For example, would it be such a dreadful thing if an employer of five men who was engaged in a particular trade was required to employ one apprentice? Would it be such a dreadful thing if, under the subcontract system, which has been destroying our apprenticeship schemes, employers were required by law to employ apprentices instead of getting the job done as quickly as they can, making as much as they can and forgetting about the future?

a st).!pyof this very great problem of the flooding of the Parramatta River basin. Whenever a new subdivision had been created in the Hills District around Parramatta, particularly in Baulkham Hills and Castle Hill it has meant the building of additional roads, footpaths, gutters and driveways, all of which occupy land which would normally absorb water. As a result, the run-off has become more massive over time. It finds its way down into the creeks and eventually into the centre of the City of Parramatta. The result is that the David Jones store in that city has already been under water three times. If that problem is not corrected, it will become more serious as each year passes. I refer to. the creeks around there, to the areas of Pye's Crossing, Johnson's Bridge and nearby areas along the old Windsor Road, which is one of the most historic roads in this country. A number of people have' been drowned on the bridges in that area; as they drive along their cars are swept away and they are drowned.
The Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporaton, together with Willing and Partners Pty Ltd, who are consulting engineers to the Water Resources Commission of the New South Wales Government, have put forward a proposition which was originally put forward to this Government as the result of a report from the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation commissioned by the Labor Government and financed by the present Government. Having received the report, the Government has refused to take any action whatsoever, despite a number of deaths in the region. The report recommends what one might call retaining weirs, in the hills, so that the waters are retained., In other words, the flood waters instead' Of rushing down will be retained for a period and the floods will be more steady. As I have said, if something is not done many more lives will be lost and, furthermore, Parramatta itself will go under water time and time again, and

Let us consider the bricklaying industry. Unless far more often. The proposition has been put up

something drastic is done the public will be paying and a submission has been made to this Govern-

more and more because of the shortage of skills ment by the New Sout~ Wales Minister. So far as

and the lack of trained apprentices. There will be the report entitled 'Parramatta River Flood Miti-

fewer and fewer tradesmen in the field. These are gation Investigation' is concerned, this prop-

the sorts of issues that the Government should be osition provides that a detention basin at the site

facing up to and considering.

shown as 2B in the report-I will not go into the

I would like to take this opportunity to refer to the flooding of the Parramatta River basin. I have

details of that-should be constructed as quickly as possible.

here correspondence from the Honourable A. R. The New South Wales Minister has made an

L. Gordon, the Minister for Lands, Forests and approach to this Government, which he tells me

Water Resources in the New South Wales would involve the National Water Resources

Government. I will give a little of the history of Program which is jointly funded by the Common-

this matter. Some years ago, when the Labor wealth, State and local government in a ratio of

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 163

2:2:1 respectively. The Blacktown City Council considered the matter last week and it has agreed to provide the funds, which it would have to provide, of $40,800. The Baulkham Hills Shire Council has ignored the matter in the past, and I have not heard of it approving anything, even though it would be concerned with a large proportion of the water. It would have to provide $67,200. The Holrbyd Municipal Council would have to provide $32,400 and the Parramatta City Council would have to provide $99,600. They will be the amounts if the Commonwealth comes to the party. I make a two-pronged appeal tonight, firstly for the Commonwealth to come to the party to save lives and to save the City of Parramatta from flooding. It is one of the most historic cities in this country. Secondly I appeal to the councils which have not already agreed to the proposal to look to their consciences and do the job.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-

Order! The honourable member's time has

expired.

'

Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield) (8.43)-It is always a great privilege to participate in the Address-in-Reply debate in this House. It is a privilege to represent an electorate such as mine and equally I believe it is a privilege for every member of this House to be returned here either for the first or a subsequent time to represent a section of the people of Australia. Honourable members just now have heard the usual diatribe from the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage). I have listened to him on many occasions speaking, as he does so eloquently, about the problems of the unerriployed. It is unfortunate for the honourable member for Chifley that, apart from giving statistics, in his own electorate he does not appear to have done much else. A few months ago at the Federal elections the Australian Labor Party, which once again is in Opposition, advised the Australian people and made dire forecasts of what would become of this nation if the Fraser Government were returned. In fact, the situation is exactly the opposite of the gloom, despondency and despair that the Opposition told the Australian people would occur this year. It was wrong about unemployment, it was wrong about inflation, and it was wrong about economic growth.

Mr Armitage-What? Have a look at today's figures.

Mr CONNOLLY-The honourable member for Chifley should look at the figures as they relate to the situation. He is happy to take only aggregate figures. He should have drawn from them the

obvious conclusion which anyone in this House with half a brain would appreciate; namely, that in the early new year it is a fact that the rate of unemployment amongst school leavers always goes up. The honourable member should also have noted, had he bothered to read his statistics for the last three years or so-especially last year-that there was a significant fall in the rate of unemployment of young school leavers. The reality is simply that there are now 170,000 more people in jobs than a year ago, and that is over 300,000 more people in jobs than two years ago. That is the reality. It is unfortunate that school leavers are unemployed. It is a great tragedy that that is the situation but the fact of the matter is that it is not unique to Australia. It is an endemic reality through which the entire Western world is passing. There is not one government of the Western world worth its salt that has not been prepared to look as hard as this Government has looked to seek and to find reasonable arrangements to look after the welfare of those people and, above all, to enable them to have the qualifications and the capacity to enter the labour market.
In my opinion some of the points made by the honourable member for Chifley had some merit. For example, he emphasised the problem of education. It is true that there is a problem with education. He knows that because I tried the first youth work program in his electorate. He is aware of what I did in his electorate. He is aware that I took some of his young people to my electorate and, as far as I know, each one received training and found jobs. We have continued that program. We have taken young people from Hornsby and elsewhere in the metropolitan area. I know as much about the problems of unemployed youth as the honourable member, and probably anybody else in this place. It is a most pitiful situation when there are yourig people in our community who, quite frankly, cannot read or write. It is all right to talk about them in terms of statistics but they are more than statistics, they are human beings. It is a tragedy that the education system of which they were meant to be a part taught them so little, but that is the fact. That is the reality. Whatever our sins of commission in the past may have been, whatever government may have been in power in past years, State or federal-unfortunately the blame in most of this area has to lie at the State level-the fact is that a growing percentage of young people for various reasons find it difficult to gain employment because they do not have the qualifications which make employment a reality in terms of their capacity to offer something to potential employers.

164 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Nevertheless, the fact remains that we hav~ trained over 400,000 Australians during the last three years. We have given those people the capacity to. be retrained; we have taken young people and put them through technical colleges and various other courses and high levels of education so that they are better equipped to go into the work force. The ultimate, and only, solution to youth unemployment and for that matter to any other type of unemployment in the community is to create, as the Government is doing, a sound economic base which will create jobs which people can fill. The honourable member for Chifiey, and regrettably other members of his ilk, will take the view that somehow or other governments can create jobs. What they are supposed to do is left to the figment of one's imagination. I recall two wonderful stories told to me about the days of the Regional Employment Development Scheme. In a small country town it was decided that it should have a tennis court, and it was built under the RED Scheme. Then someone got the bright idea that they should have a night tennis court so electric light wires and so forth were put up, and the whole thing was superb. The sad fact is that the town was not on the main grid and they did not have sufficient power to run the lights on the courts of an evening. Stories such as that are innumerable and are to be found in virtually every electorate in Australia.
It is for that reason, because of the Labor Government's experience and failure with the RED Scheme, that this Government was advised by the public servants-rightly so-that those sorts of programs were simply not cost effective. The honourable member is talking about putting people into a situation where they virtually waste their time in doing something which is of no real use either to themselves or to the community. The important thing is to find people useful employment in which they can then develop their skills and abilities and make a contribution to society and, above all, get the self-respect which quite obviously is lacking in a person who has to suffer the problem of unemployment for any length of time.
The position today is that in a recent report of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Australia is regarded as having one of the world's most successful economies. In statistical terms and in virtually every other aspectforeign investment and so forth-we are undoubtedly one of the leaders of the Western world today. We have a future which, frankly, is second to none. The only thing we have to fear is the stupidity of some people in Australia, especially members of the Australian Labor Party, who seem to believe that as good Australians they can

taJ~, this country into a rut and somehow or other be able to talk it out of it. The simple fact of the matter is that there is only one way to solve this natlon's problems and that is.to build up a sound economy based on a community which has confidence in its nation's future and in the destiny of its people. On the basis of confidence the people will make the decisions and the investments which will create the jobs of which we have heard so much tonight.
We are talking at the moment about a growth rate in the gross domestic product in Australia this financial year of approximately four per cent. That is four times the forecast rate for the rest of the developed world, which, for those who cannot work out the difference, is a mere one per cent. In other words Australia's rate of growth is expected to be greater than that of all the major industrial countries in the European Economic Community and the OECD area. In fact, many of them are not going to show any major growth at all. It is quite likely that this will have some impact in the foreseeable future on some of our extractive industries. They are totally dependent on overseas markets.
One very satisfactory feature which we have witnessed, especially since November oflast year, has been the considerable pick-up in consumer demand in terms of the internal Australian economy. We have noted in the last four or five years that consumer demand has been slack, that it has not been satisfactory. Perhaps one of the reasons was that people were concerned about the ultimate outcome of the situation. The fact that they are now spending their money and are prepared to make long term commitments demonstrates that, whatever fears they may have had and which they certainly inherited from the unfortunate Whitlam years, the average Australian is today prepared to look to the future with some confidence in the belief that in this nation he will be able to bring up his children in a higher standard of living than possibly any other country. Provided this country continues to have sound economic leadership it will be able to proceed into the future with the satisfaction of knowing that we can achieve what we set out to achieve.
To have a stronger rate of growth in the Australian economy-I cannot repeat this too often-is the only way ultimately to strengthen the basis for employment. Personal income and private consumption are also key elements of this formula. They were all emphasised by the OECD in its last annual report. The OECD is an independent body. It does not have to go around pandering to the Australian Government or anybody else. It sees the realities and the statistics as they

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 165

are. It is a body which makes its own assessment

on the basis of the evidence before it.

.: .,

We on this side of the House have every reason to be proud of the Australian Government, given the difficulties of the last few years. All honourable members, especially my colleagues, will appreciate that they were difficult years for all of us. We are at last seeing the product of those difficult decisions which had to be made. They were decisions which we were always told by the Opposition were wrong. The Opposition fell for the fundamental mistake of looking for the soft
option. There is no soft option in these situations. We have taken the hard decision and we have been proven right. The Australian people refused to accept the blandishments, the hypocrisy and the nonsense which were fed to them in the last election by the Opposition. Today the Australian people are demonstrating with their pockets, by the way they are going out into the market place and spending, that they have confidence in the
future of this nation, as do the people who have been given the responsibility of leading this nation further into the 1980s and of giving additional years of great satisfaction and national achievement.

I wanted to make those observations merely because I felt that the honourable member for Chifiey, in the remarks I heard from him, was less than fair to this nation. He was certainly unfair to the facts of the situation and was not prepared to admit that the problems we have faced in recent years are extremely difficult to solve. Nobody can say that this Government has not been prepared to do whatever it can, in co-ordination with the private sector and the State governments, to give employment opportunities and training as best we can to those who need them. Whilst the figures still need to be higher, the fact is that an achievement of 400,000 trained positions is a figure which has never been attained by any other Australian government.

In the niinutes which I have left to me I would like to spend some time talking about the future of the private sector and the relationship between that sector and the Australian citizen. I believe that this nation is more able than any other nation on earth to give its citizens the highest standard of living. More importantly, because of our natural heritage, the people of Australia should have the opportunity to involve themselves in a real and practical way in the development of our capacity in the mineral and agricultural sectors and elsewhere. It must never be forgotten that in the latter
years of the 1980s and beyond this nation will be one of a literal handful which will b~ exporters of minerals as well as energy. That not only puts

Australia in a unique position but also and more importantly places upon us a major responsibility-a responsibility to our people and, above all, a responsibility to mankind, especially to those countries of the Third World which, for various reasons, do not have the opportunities we have been fortunate enough to inherit. Basically, this means that it is essential that we devise, in co- . ordination with the private sector, a range of opportunities so that every Australian will have the chance to feel that he has a personal commitment to the economic development of this nation.
The statistical realities which we are seeing in Australia and which have been compared to those of every other Western country demonstrate only too clearly that in recent years there has been a considerable falling !J.way of the involvement of the individual in share ownership in this country and elsewhere in the Western world. On the other hand, equity participation by large companies and institutions has grown apace. The impact which this can create in the longer term is difficult to understand totally at this stage, but perhaps a couple of points can be made. Firstly, if the individual in society is led to believe that he really has no part to play, it follows naturally that he is less than concerned about the ultimate result. It follows equally that if the individual in society is given the opportunities and is made to feel that he does have a part to play, not necessarily by his physical involvement but more specifically by his financial involvement, it obviously follows that he will be interested in the outcome and the success of the company, corporation or institution with which he is associated. To deal completely through institutions, which is a growing trend, is to place a third party between the person who intiates the decision and the company which utilises that capital investment. It ultimately means that the nexus is broken and there is no longer that connection between the person and the company in which the investment has been made.
The simple fact that 1 am trying to put over is that it is essential to the success of the private sector in Australia that the shareholding base within the community be increased considerably above its present level. This means that, with the assistance of the stock exchanges and the other financial institutions in Australia, we have to go out to the Australian people and explain to them what the advantages are of their involvement in the development of their nation. 1 wonder how many people look at the list of figures in the stock exchange reports of the daily newspapers and say: 'I do not understand what that means. I am sure that it only refers to rich people'. Of course, the simple fact is that a company like the Broken Hill

166 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Proprietary Co. Ltd has over 111,000 small invesnot get very far unless he has a job which ulti-

tors among its owners. The important point is that mately must be provided essentially by the private

those people are the owners of BHP.

sector.

Every company in Australia should be proud to say that it has a significant number of Australian citizens who own that company and who are vitally concerned in the welfare and destiny of that company because through the improvement of those individual operations alone will we see the ultimate development of our nation. Much has to be done in this area, however. Not only is it a question of getting out and selling the concept to the Australian people but also, more importantly, it is essential that the nation and the Government in particular be prepared to negotiate with the organisations concerned to encourage companies, for example, to offer shares to their employees and to bring their employees into a closer relationship with the operation which ultimately is their bread and butter. Obviously, if people are made to feel that they have a part to play, their involvement in that operation and their financial success will depend to some degree on the success of the operation.
One would perhaps be less than naive to lllake the point that perhaps it could even have some impact on industrial relations. I have no doubt that there are employers in Australia who have been less than satisfactory in looking for ways in which they can improve the relationship between their employees and their own corporate entities. As I understand it those companies which have taken this step have had a very successful industrial relations record because the people who work for them have a loyalty towards the company. They are made to feel that there is a family relationship and that the success of the company is a success for every single participant in that operation.
Mr N. A. Brown-Fletcher Jones.
Mr CONNOLLY-Yes. The firm of Fletcher Jones and Staff at Warrnambool is a classic example of this. I realise that on the other side of the House there are people who think that the socialist dialectic sees no room for any possible linkage between capital and labour. I believe that there has been too much confusion, irritation and total concern for too long both in this chamber and certainly in this nation between the employer and the employee who apparently believe that, if a 'hands-off' or an 'at arm's length' relationship cannot be maintained, something must be basically wrong. The employer cannot exist without the employee. As we heard from the honourable member for Chifley, obviously the employee will

We have to work together as a people and we have to work together as a nation if we are to have any possibility of developing the resources of our country and to reach for the undoubted opportunities .which we have been given. This can be done. There will always be a major place in the private sector for all sections of the community which are prepared to 'put their capital to work. Each Australian has capital. For example, some people in parts of the electorate of the honourable member for Chifley have the highest disposable incomes in New South Wales. How those people spend their money, of course, is their decision. But I doubt strongly whether anybody has ever gone to many of those people and made the simple suggestion that perhaps it would be worth their while considering investments, other than the banks and the building societies, out of which they could get something worth while.
Much has to be done in this area. I am looking for. ideas. I believe that this is a prospect which can only bring success to this nation and to the people. We are undoubtedly on the threshold of enormous development. We are dealing with sums of money which we have never known before. Equally, if we are not able to use our own national resources-above all, the resources of our own people; their flesh and blood as well as their capacity to work-quite clearly we will be less than able to achieve the undoubted opportunities which lie before us.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (9.4)-1 congratulate the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) for his attempt to present the human face of capitalism in what is in effect his pre-selection speech for the Ministry. We will be watching his career with interest over the next few stressful d.ays.
The world is passing through a massive economic crisis. In some technologically advanced nations there has been a sharp swing to the political right. This is illustrated most recently and most compellingly in the United States by the election in November 1980 of President Ronald Reagan. The sheer complexity and expense of running modern society, a growing sense that affairs are out of control and a mounting collective and individual frustration at the international constraints against the use of America's political and economic power have led to a national obsession that complex problems should be met by simple solutions-the more complex the problem,

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 167

the simpler the solution. This has led to a move-
ment with the strength of a religious revival, a re-
turn to robust simplicities, to the code of rugged individualism and to a growing faith in what Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts has called 'bumper sticker economics'. We have something of that American mood in Australia but it is largely confined to Queensland and Western Australia.
Mr Goodluck-And Tasmania.
Mr BARRY JONES-And Tasmania, as my friend from Franklin points out. The right wing economic revivalism in the United States is based on a naked appeal to self-interest. Five main ideas have been pushed: First, that the interests of the government and the people are opposed and that government must be reduced in extent and cost so that it gets off the backs of the people; second, that the affluent should be allowed to enjoy the fruits of their labour without having to subsidise, through progressive taxation and other redistributive measures, the poor, the ignorant, the unemployed or the sick; third, that capitalism, or free enterprise as we call it here, can enjoy an expansion of production which will lead to an economic rebirth if only government withdraws from all regulatory measures whether fiscal, environmental or social, leaving the economy to the regulation of market forces alone; fourth, that in the final analysis only money matters, that the pursuit of wealth is a noble aim, and that the community ought to be deeply suspicious of anyone whose motive is other than economic; and, fifth, that the best way to aid the poor is to teach them to be selfreliant and that this knowledge will lead to greater

personal and economic development than any welfare mechanism. In other words, kicking the poor will transform them, raise their status and put money in their pockets. These five ideas are dangerous fallacies. They are fantasies based on a total misreading of the realities of a complex urban environment. I regret to say that they are current views not just in the United States but here in Australia. The five points made could have been expressed just as well by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser).
The collapse of Keynesian orthodoxy in the 1970s following the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries oil price shocks of 1973-74 and the growth in unemployment in most technologically advanced nations led to a long intellectual vacuum in economics which was largely filled with little resistance by the free market and monetorist nostrums of Professor Milton Friedman-views which were adopted in Australia first by Mr Phillip Lynch, as he then was, the gurus of the Australian Treasury, notably Mr John Stone, and ultimately by Malcolm Fraser, then Leader of the Opposition and later Prime Minister. To assist in understanding the variety of political approaches to economic problems, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a 'Table of Political Economy' by Paul Davidson, Professor of Economics at Rutgers University, which appeared in a special issue of The Public Interest in 1980.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

A TABLE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

SocialistRadical

NeoKeynesian

Keynes

Neoclassical synthesis Keynesian

MonetatistNeoclassical

Politics Money
Wage rate and income distribution
Capital Theory Employment Theory

Extreme left

Left of centre

Real forces Real forc.;:s emphasized-money e mph a s i zed,
merely a tool for money assumed to existing power accommodate. structure.

Wage rate basis of value. Income distribution the most important economic question.

Money wage is the linchpin of the price level. Income distribution very important.

Surplus generated by reserve army.
Any level of employment possible. Assumes growth in employment over time. Ful1 employment creates crisis for capitalism.

Surplus needed over wages.
Growth with any level of employment possible, although growth at full employment emphasized.

Centre Money and real forces intimately related.
Money wage rate fundamental; income distribution question of less importance.
Scarci ty theory (quasi-rents). Any level of employment possible; full employment desirable.

Right of centre
Money matters along with everything else.

Extreme right Only money matters.

Wage rate one of many prices. Iricome distribution is the resultant of al1 the demand and supply equations in a general equilibrium system. Income distribution a matter of equity, not of 'scientific' inquiry.

Marginal productivity theory and wel1behaved production functions.

Full employment assumed; unemployment is a disequilibrium situation.

Ful1 employment assumed in long run; nb explicit short-run theory of employment.

168 REPRESENJATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

SocialistRadical

NeoKeynesian

Keynes

Neoclassical synthesis Keynesian

MonetaristNeoclassical

Inflation Well-known representatives:

Primarily due to m 0 n e y wag e changes, but can also be due to profit margin changes.
Bowles, D. Gordon, All Marxists

Due to money wage or profit margin changes.

Due to changes in money wages, productivity and/or profit margins.

Galbraith, Joan Harrod, Shackle, Robinson, Kaldor, Weintraub, DavidSraffa, Pasinetti, son, Min sky, Eichner, Kregel, Wells, Vickers Harcourt
Post Keynesians

In long run primarily a monetary phenomenon being related to money supply via portfolio decisions. In short run may be related to Phillips curve.
Solow, Samuelson, Tobin, Clower, Leijonhufvud, J. R.Hicks

Primarily a monetary ph~nomenon in the sense of being related to the supply of money via portfolio decisions.
Friedman, Brunner, Meltzer, Parkin, Laidler

This is entitled 'A Table of Political Economy' because it attempts to associate the various schools of modern economic thought with different positions on the political spectrum, from extreme right to extreme left. Obviously the divisions are not watertight, but the views of individuals within anyone school tend to be very close, and where there is overlap among the schools, the overlap tends to be greatest between individuals in schools that are adjacent in the table.

Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. The fallacy of the Friedmanite position is that it overemphasises the virtues of competitiveness in an increasingly densely packed and interdependent social and urban environment. The constant rhetorical appeals to rugged individualism evoke a powerful and emotional response from the successful and the motivated. But, to jobless urban blacks in blighted areas where unemployment is running between 30 per cent and 40 per cent of the labour force, these appeals evoke only rage and frustration. The fires next time, when they come, will have far more impact than the riots and arson of 1968. This may produce the greatest domestic division in the US since the Civil War with no Abraham Lincoln in sight, with an even sharper movement to the right by the middle class. Perhaps an armed middle class will be prepared to shoot to defend its own interests. I draw attention to a recent book entitled The Zero-Sum Society: Distribution and the Possibilities for Economic Change by Lester C. Thurow, Professor of Economics at the' Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 1. K. Galbraith stated:
Thurow's general concern, the one that provides his title, is with public policy in an economy which no longer yields large annual increases in real income. Such increases no longer being in prospect, it follows that any important benefit for any considerable group of citizens requires an equivalent sacrifice somewhere else. Thus the zero-sum game. The ability of the affluent to identify actual or potential sacrifice is highly developed, so if there must be sacrifice, the most promising opportunity is to reduce the largesse accruing from government to the always undeserving poor. Things were far easier back when the poor could be bought off out of the annual increases in income, with much additional and righteously deserved income going to the upper-income brackets as well.
Of course, in the nineteenth century, which many of the right wingers in the United States hanker

for, the United States had about 80 per cent of its population self-employed living in small towns and, notwithstanding the division of labour, per~ forming a variety of tasks. In the twentieth century, more than 80 per cent of Americans are employees, living in large cities or towns, performing a narrow range of specialised tasks, increasingly interdependent and reliant on the provision of government services-education, health, waste disposal, water supply, postal and welfare services-which help, incidentally, to maintain the levels of demand by the the poor, factors which are increasingly important to the market economy.
Even more serious, there is a failure to understand the extent of the revolution which is transforming the economy of all technologically advanced nations-that is the movement from art industrial society to a post-industrial society. In an important article in the New York Review of Books for 5 February 1981 entitled 'Reagan and the Real America', Professor Emma Rothschild of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Sorbonne uses the latest figures in Employment. and Earnings (1980) from the United States Department of Labor to point out the vast shift in patterns of work in the 1970s. This decade was marked by very high job creation combined with low productivity growth-a refutation of Okun's law, one of the pieces of conventional economic wisdom like the Phillips curve which went by the board in the' -1970s. As Emma Rothschild says, employment in three industries-eating and drinking places, health services and business services, including mail delivery and janitoring-increased three times as fast

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 169

as total private employment and 16 times as fast as employment in the goods producing or industrial sector of the economy. She notes:
The increase in employment in eating and drinking places since 1973 is greater than total employment in the automobile and steel industries combined.
But it has to be pointed out that that enormous employment growth is largely female, largely part-time, largely unskilled, largely non-unionised and largely, of course, without much prospect of job satisfaction or advancement. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard Emma Rothschild's article. I am grateful to the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) who suggested that instead of just incorporating segments, I incorporate the whole of what is an immensely valuable article.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
REAGAN AND THE REAL AMERICA
Emma Rothschild
Mr Reagan has an imposing vision of the country that he is to lead. He sees an inherent America-an America which is white, and male, and industrial-and a project, of economic growth, by which this reality can be born again. He sees a "spirit" which is "still there, ready to blaze into life" if we "stimulate our economy, increase productivity, and put America back to work." But his America no longer exists. The pursuit of his vision may lead to an economic crisis and a level of unemployment in comparison with which the events of 1975 and 1980 will appear as the merest disturbances of the compassionate state.
During the election, Mr Reagan spoke frequently about the American economy, and his words served him well. They had resonance-such is the political charm of the president-tobe-on two quite different levels. First, in policies, projections, and legislative proposals. Second, and far more importantly, in the imagination and in a tableau of American resurgence, packed and repacked in the cardboard of the traveling theater, which journeyed with Mt Reagan through his seemingly interminable electoral wanderings.
The first level of economic discourse can be dismissed fairly expeditiously. Mr Reagan said that he would cut income tax by 30 percent by 1983, that he would reduce business taxes in order to stimulate investment, that he would increase military spending, that while he would eliminate waste in government he would not assault the "integrity" of Social Security, that he would in the meal)time balance the federal budget, and that his policies would reduce inflation.
The unlikeliness of this enterprise is not hidden by the
appointment or' a Cabinet balanced between wild tax cutters
and men who appear as pillars of fiscal responsibility. We need not doubnhe new government's resolution to kick the poor by eliminating social programs, The Republican policy equation depends, nonetheless on the assumption of rapid economic growth. Only then would tax revenues be equal to Mr Reagan's extravagant schemes.
But such accelerated growth seems unlikely. The United States exports more than 10 percent of its gross national product, and the countries with which it trades are sickly. Industrial production turned down in the second quarter 0[,1980 in each of the five largest capital economies.' The number of people looking for jobs in the European Community has increased by 20 percent in one year.3 The world economy may

be moving, as Mr Reagan takes office, toward the synchronous recession of 1981-1982.

The expectation of economic growth thus depends in turn on a further assumption: that some unknown Republican inspiration, some elixir of indigenous capitalist expansion, will intervene to make possible the American regeneration. It is here that Mr Reagan's imaginative tableau is of importance.

The scene is of an innate economy, an economy of industrial'workers, male, white, neither young nor old, which is to "get working again." It is the country of the man in the. RepUblican television commercial, standing lonely but determined in a deserted factory that he hopes to bring to life. And it is the country of basic manufacturing values. In his main economic speech, Mr Reagan mentioned only two industries. "Outdated depreciation schedules," he said, "now prevent many industries, especially steel and auto, from modernizing their plants.'" The image is related, in turn, to the idea of remilitarization. The resurgent America will be equipped with missiles and tanks and military transport planes. Mr Reagan repeatedly joined his objectives, of reconstructing "a disin~ tegrating economy, a weakened defense."

It is on this vision that the Republican mission of restoring economic confidence relies. The new policies, Mr Reagan's adviser George Shultz says, will have "an electric effect on expectations."5 Like other observers of capitalist behaviour, including Keynes, the Reaganites believe in an investment "spirit." The "strategy," Reagan himself says, "is based on solid economic principles and basiC experience in both the govenment and the marketplace. It has worked before and will work again."- And indeed his imagery corresponds to the reality of the postwar period. The two great surges in recent American economic growth, from 1950 to 1953, and from 1962 to 1966, were each accompanied by an even more rapid increase in manufacturing ouput; each was also a period of
rapid expansion in the military economy.

The vision is not implausible. But it is false. For the structural changes that have taken place in the US economy in the 1970s are such that the old truths no longer hold. These changes-in the structure of employment and also in the structure of military expenditure-make Mr Reagan's regeneration, his Pittsburgh Redivivus, unlikely. They also hold out the possibility of a far more cruel economic crisis to come.

The 1970s were a time of startingly rapid expansion in employment in the American economy. In the period of the economic crisis alone, from 1973 to 1979, almost 13 million new nonagricultural jobs were created of which almOSt 11 million were in the private economy.' This is as though the entire labour force of Canada had moved south and found employment in the United States. The US had by far the most rapid growth in total employment of any major industrial country: from 1973 to 1979, it was more than three times'as fast as in Japan, while employment actually fell in West Germany, and was virtually unchanged in France and the United Kingdom.'

The new American jobs were concentrated, however, in

two sectors of the private economy-services and retail.

trade-and, at least in the early 1970s, in One public sector,

state and local government. By 1979, 43 percent of all

Americans employed in the private nonagricultural economy

'worked in services and retail trade. The two sectors together

provided more than 70 percent of all new private jobs created

from

1973 ,

to

the

summer

of.

1980.'

.

Even within these two vast sectors, the growth in employment was further concentrated. Three industries each provided more than a million new jobs during the 1973-1979 period. "eating and drinking places," including fast food restaurants; "health services," including private hospitals, nursing homes, and doctors' and dentists' offices; and "business services," including personnel supply services, data processing

170 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

services, reproduction and mailing, and the quaintly named "services to buildings." These three industries together accounted for more than 40 percent of the new private jobs created between 1973 and the summer of 1980. In that period their employment increased almost three times as fast as total private employment, and sixteen times as fast as employment in the goods-producing or industrial sector of the economy.
The three "new" industries loom very large in total employment. Mr Reagan's fundamental manufacturing industries are insignificant by comparison. Thus the increase in employment in eating and drinking places since 1973 is greater than total employment in the automobile and steel industries combined." Total employment in the three industries is greater than total employment in an entire range of basic productive industries: construction, all machinery, all electric and electronic equipment, motor vehicles, aircraft, ship building, all chemicals and products, and all scientific and other instruments.
This transformation has profound consequences for the organisation of society, and for the American economy. The new jobs are different in several respects from jobs in productive industry. In the first place, they provide employment for women. Women accounted for 41 per cent of all employment in 1979, and 31 per cent of all manufacturing employment; they accounted for 56 per cent of a\1 people employed in eating and drinking places, 43 per cent of employment in business services (a sharp increase since the early 1970s), and 81 per cent of employment in health services. Waiting on ta bles, defrosting frozen hamburgers, rendering 'services to buildings',looking after the old and the ill: 'women's work'.
Second, jobs in the big three industries of the 1970s offer short hours. People working in eating and drinking places work the shortest weekly hours of any industry: 26.4 hours in 1979, compared to an average of 35.7 for the entire private economy, and 40.2 in manufacturing. (,Services to buildings' and health services are also parsimonious in hours worked.) Third, hourly pay is very low. Eating and drinking places offer the lowest average hourly earnings (excluding tips) of any industry. Business services and health services are also among the low-paid industries. Employees in 'nursing and personal care facilities', for example-of whom 89 per cent are women-earned an average of $3.87 per hour in 1979, compared to an average of $6.16 in the entire private economy, and $6.69 in manufacturing. And these pitiful earnings increase very slowly. Hourly earnings in services, measured in 1972 dollars, fell from $3.16 in 1973 to $3.08 in 1979; earnings in retail trade fell from $2.70 to $2.61. Over the same period real hourly earnings in manufacturing increased from $3.83 to $3.85, while earnings in the motor vehicle industry increased from $5.13 to $5.22."
Fourth, the new positions are 'dead-end' jobs'. One measure of the prospects for change and promotion in an industry is the proportion of a\1 jobs which are for production or nonsupervisory workers. The average for the private economy in 1979 was 82 per cent; for manufacturing it was 72 per cent, with such adventurous industries as chemicals requiring only 57 per cent non-supervisory workers, aircraft 54 per cent, and guided missiles 32 per cent. Business services, by comparison, employ 87 per cent nonsupervisory workers, health services 89 per cent, and eating and drinking places 92 per cent. Fifth, the 'new' industries, with their short hours, temporary and part-time employment, and their women workers, are less protected by union agreements and benefits than are older manufacturing industries: the motor vehicle industry, for example, with its unemployment compensation, health benefits, and increasing earnings.
The booming labor-intensive industries are, finally, distinct economically from older productive industries. Their 'structure' in input/output terms, for example, is different from that of manufacturing industries. They buy inputs from a very

few other industries, and most of these suppliers are similarly ,'orowded into the service and trade sectors. Thus the business services industry does not buy as much as a penny's worth of inputs, per dollar of its output, from any manufacturing industry; its major purchases consist of services from real estate and from itself. (Purchases of capital equipment are not covered in these statistics.) Medical services spend about three cents per dollar on food and drugs, and just over one cent on such suitably office-bound inputs as paper and printing; the important purchases are of business and other services. Eating and drinking places spend thirty-two cents per dollar of out-put on 'food and kindred products', one cent on paper and paper containers, and the rest of their substantial purchases in the transport, trade, and service sectors.
This more or less hermetic behaviour is in evident contrast with the more familiar input/output profile of, for example, the motor vehicles industry: for each dollar of output, it buys two cents worth of textiles, three cents worth of rubber, one cent of glass, eight cents of screws, seven cents of iron, one cent of engines, one cent of miscellaneous machinery, twentytwo cents from motor vehicles and equipment, and so forth ..."
The new service industries are isolated from the coming and going of intermediate inputs, from the propensity, in Adam Smith's phrase, to 'truck, barter and exchange one thing for another'.
The United States, in sum, is moving toward a structure of employment ever more dominated by jobs that are badly paid, unchanging, and unproductive. This most industrial of societies, this bourgeois EI Dorado has in fact gone further toward a service and retail economy than any other of the largest industrial countries. Two 'activities' in international industrial classifications, 'wholesale and retail trade including restaurants and hotels' and 'community, social, and personal services', together correspond approximately to American trade and services activities (although they also include public employees and wholesale trade). The United States has by far the highest proportion of its employed popUlation in these activities of any of the five major industrial countries: 51 per cent in 1978, compared to 44 per cent in Japan and 37 per cent in Germany. In the race toward servicesI3 the United States-how shameful, how distant from Republican hopeshad surpassed even Sweden, which still had only 48 per cent of its employment in trade and community services.
It is in this morose environment that Mr. Reagan's industrial Geist must blaze into life. Is such resurrection likely? There are, it seems to me, two successive great dangers ahead. The first is that the policy will not work, that the spirit will fizzle. The second is that the doomed pursuit of the Republican resurrection may lead to a disintegration of the employment-intensive industries, and thus to tremendously increased levels of unemployment, particularly among the poorest and least protected workers. Eventually, as we will see, this may bring about a new "industrial" boom. But it would be one that in virtually no way resembles Mr Reagan's essential heavy industry. And the long term in question would be extended, and vicious beyond any part of the postwar economic experience.
In order to explore the first danger, we need to look more closely at the economic consequences of the changing employment structure. Here we see that the movement is from high to low productivity sectors of the economy. For retail trade and services have the lowest productivity, as measured by conventional economic indicators, in the entire nonagricultural economy. In both output per hours worked, and output per person employed, the two sectors are well below the national average.
(It is important to be clear that this low productivity is not a consequence of the proportion of women workers in retail and services. The industrial sector with the highest

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 171

productivity-finance, insurance, and real estate-is also among the most feminized in its labor force. The sector where productivity is growing fastest, communication, also has a higher proportion of women workers than the national average. Within manufacturing, electric and electronic equipment-the source of much innovation for the entire economy-has a higher than average proportion of women workers. Nor is there a strong correlation between output per hour worked and hourly earnings. Workers in finance are among the lowest paid in the economy.)
We might think of the private American economy as being composed of two sectors, sector I and sector II, where sector II consists of the fast-growing retail and service industries, and sector I of all other industries. Employment in II, as we have seen, accounts for 43 per cent of total employment in 1979, up from 38 per cent in 1969, and its advantage has been accelerating. But it accounts for less than 26 per cent of total output, and this proportion has scarcely changed since 1969."
Output per employed person in sector II was $9,853 in 1979 (measured in 1972 dollars); in sector I it was $21,433. The consequences of the shift are yet more dire because productivity in II is not only low but also grows slowly, or not at all. Output per employee in II was lower in 1979 than in 1973; in sector I it increased 1 per cent per year over the same period.
The shift to sector II is likely, thus, to have affected overall rates of growth of output per employee. Consider, for example, a different kind of economic growth: H-growth, or high-industrial growth. Suppose that, under conditions of Hgrowth, all of the 10.8 million new private jobs created in 1973-1979 had gone to workers in I. And suppose also that output per worker had still changed at its actual rate in the two sectors. By 1979H, the total product of the economy would have been $1,302 billion, instead of$l,233 billion. Output per worker would have been $17,622 instead of $16,552. Instead of essentially no growth in output per employed person (0.03 per cent per year), there would have been an increase of 1 per cent per year.
We might consider a more likely alternative-N or normal growth, for an outcome in which the increase in employment from 1973-1979 was divided between sectors I and II in the same 'normal'-proportion as was the increase in employment from 1949 to 1969. Even under N-growth, output per worker in 1979N would be significantly higher, at $16,781, than the actual outcome. Real growth in output per employed person, over the period between 1973 and 1979N, would have been a modest but respectable 0.261 per cent per year." These simple calculations are not, of course, comparable with studies of the effects of 'structural shift' on productivity defined as output per hour worked. But they do suggest some economic consequences of the movement into sector II employment.16
The shift in employment is thus likely to be implicated in one of the most lamented problems of the recent American economy, namely the slow rate of growth of productivity. Output per hours worked in the private non-farm economy-to revert to the most widely used measure-which increased 2.2 per cent per year from 1950 to 1973, increased only 0.5 per cent per year from 1973 to 1979; the level of productivity was actually lower in 1979 than in 1978, and is lower in 1980 than in 1979."
The tribulation of a slowing rate of productivity growth is not new. Mr Reagan's Republican predecessors were similarly preoccupied: compare Mr Nixon's 'comprehensive national crusade' to increase productivity of 1972 with Mr Reagan's marginally less felicitous 'great national crusade to make America great again'." But the United States is peculiarly afflicted in comparison with its international competitors. From 1973 to 1977, it had the lowest rate of growth of productivity of any of the five large industrial powers-lower than even Britain's." Productivity growth rates have been

decelerating in all the largest industrial countries; only in the United States has the level of productivity actually been falling.
The structural changes in employment and output also make it less likely that the strictly industrial part of the economy can bring about a new boom. For even within the sector we have called I, 'industry'-defined as manufacturing, construction, and mining-is far from dominant. We might describe industry, in this sense, as sector lA, and a sector IB as being composed of all other I-sector activities: transportation, communication, utilities, wholesale trade and finance, insurance and real estate-what could be described as 'industrial services.'
Sector lA, on this definition, accounts for only 48 per cent of I-sector output (35 per cent of total output in I and II) and 63 per cent of I-sector employment. Sector IB has by far the highest output per employee of the three sectors: $30,400 in 1979. In sector IA output per employee is relatively low, at $16,300. Over the entire postwar period, productivity in this sector increased at about the same rate as' productivity in lB. (Within lA, however, output per employee in manufacturing has increased 1.3 per cent per year from 1973 to 1979, while output per employee in mining and construction fell substantially. )
Here again, international comparisons are interesting. Of the five major industrial countrienhe United States has the lowest proportion of its civilian employment (public and private) in the equivalent of sector IA; 30 per cent in 1978, compared to 44 per cent in West Germany, for example, or 38 per cent in Britain. Once more, the United States is less industrial, in this sense, than Sweden. The positions are the same if we look at manufacturing alone: the United States has less than 23 per cent of its total civilian employment in manufacturing, compared to 35 per cent for Germany, 27 per cent for France, and 25 per cent for Sweden.'"
How welcoming is this environment for Mr Reagan's economic policy, founded as it seems to be in the hopes of industry, of sector IA? The industrial sector is easily surpassed, in employment, by sector II; it is surpassed in total output and in output per employee in sector lB. Only the most prodigious expansion of industrial production, therefore, would suffice to invigorate the entire economy.
Consider, for example, the consequences of a more dynamic industrial performance in the 1970s. Let us double the 1973-1979 rate of growth of output per employee in sector IA-0.615 per cent per year-keeping all else constant, and call this hypothetical dynamic economy D-growth. In this outcome, 1979D output per employee in IA would be $16,913 instead of the actual $16,275. But the total growth rate of output per employee would have increased only to 0.261 per cent per year; just the same, in fact, as under our earlier hypothetical outcome (1979N) where employment in sector II grew at no more than its 'normal' historic rate.
Or imagine the transformation that. would have been required in IA in 1973-1979 to shift the private economy not to a paltry 0.2 per cent annual growth rate in output per employed person but to its historic rate, for 1947-1973, of 2.055 per cent per year. Such a shift, with conditions in the other two sectors held unchanged, would have required an increase in IA output per person employed to $22,297 in 1979S (outcome S for superdynamic). This would imply an annual growth rate of over 6 per cent from 1973-1975S: more than twice the historic growth rate of output per employee in this sector, and ten times its actual growth rate.
A 'supply side' enthusiast might answer to these considerations, that the recent emphasis on traditional industry is no more than political rhetoric; that the Republicans once in office will care not at all whether their economic recovery comes about in sector IB, sector lA, or sector LXXXIV.

172 REPRESENTATIVES 2S February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Supply-siders-like their opponents and mirror-images, the 'demand-siders' or Keynesians-are unconcerned with the real industries and workers and technologies that constitute aneconomy. They prefer to. live among the abstractions of economic theory and economic politics, whether of 'supply' and 'expectations' or of 'effective demand.'

But the primacy of traditional industry, of lA, is not easily

ignored. If the economy were to expand in sector IB, employ-

ment would be unlikely to increase fast. And the character-

istic behaviour of IB corporations-immense semi-public

utilities, bus companies and truckers, financial corporations,

AT & Tis hardly that of the sensitive, even skittish

entrepreneurs, the investors in new factories and equipment

to whom the Republican policy is addressed. Yet if growth of

output and employment continues to expand in sector II, then

the present problems of inflation and low productivity growth

will be compounded.

.

There seems a very reasonable chance, in sum, that the RepUblican inspiration will not bring about" rapid, noninflationary growth and increased productivity; that the spirit, fizzling rather than blazing, will not be equal to the constraints of domestic structure and international recession.

The Reagan program in these conditions is likely to be wildly inflationary. And the military spending to which the new government is committed will exacerbate such tendencies. The Republicans do not discuss the economic consequences of remilitarisation; nor are they likely to, given their conviction of the priority of. defense, which transcends the banal calculus of economic costs and benefits. But the military boom of 1981 is likely to bring all the. problems of previous expansions with few of their benefits. The two periods of greatest military expansion were both times of rapidly accelerating inflation. Thus the Korean War boom began in 1950, when inflation was I per cent; in 1951 inflation was over 8 per cent. The Vietnam War"related military boom began in 1966, when inflation was less than 3 per cent; since then, inflation has averaged 6 per cent per year."

At the same time, the employment effects of increased military spending will be dampened in the 1980s by the overall structural changes in the economy. The 'defense products industries' are only a minor subdivision of our sector IA: together they employ fewer workers than they did in 1967, and only a third as many people as are employed in eating and drinking places. The Defense Department employs less than two thirds as many people, military and civilian as it did in 1967, and its purview is unlikely to increase." Does Caspar Weinberger want more civilian bureaucrats? Does the Middle East Rapid Deployment Force want more quartermasters, or more missiles?

The proposed military expansion seems organised to maximise the economic costs of defense and to minimise its economic benefits. It, will favor nuclear missile 'systems,' submarines, planes, and other 'big ticket' items. But spending of this sort requires large numbers of scientists and engineers and construction workers; it requires relatively new manufacturing workers. The MX missile system, or a substitute costly project, would provide some employment, and inflation, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, it would also provide considerable inflation and employment for low productivity construction workers in Utah and Nevada. But it would not provide jobs for unemployed steel workers. MIRVed e){perimental missiles are not bolted together in assembly lines.

What will the Republicans do if their policies lead them into higher inflation and unbalanced budgets? Their most likely recourse will be to the conventional conservative remedy of recession. The old 'conservatism represented in the Reagan cabinet by Mr Regan and Mr Weinberger has its acrid but available medicines: control the money supply, increase taxes (or. limit ta){ cuts), hack with ever greater frenzy at nonmilitary government spending. There is a recent precedent for

till< .repression of neoconservative exuberance. Mrs Thatcher

came into office determined to cut taxes and inspire the

"spirit" of British entrepreneurship, but has retreated to the

purest policies of victory through recession.

.

Such conservative orthodoxy could bring about the second great danger of the Reagan economic policy, namely a collapse of employment throughout the economy. The 1970s seem to have confirmed the experience of the postwar period, that employment in sector II is immune to -the vicissitudes of the business cycle. Employment in services and to a lesser e){tent in retail trade changes, on this view, according to a long-term growth path. And the recent dominance of sector II employment has indeed been countercyclical in just this sense. From 1974 to 1975, employment in sector I fell by 2.4 million jobs; employment in sector II increased by 0.5 million jobs. Similarly during the recession of 1980. From July 1979 to July 1980, employment in I fell be 1.3 million jobs, while employment in II increased by 0.8 million jobs.".

But there are reasons to doubt whether the resilience of retail and services employment will continue into the ne){t one or two recessions of the 1980s. First, because services employment has not in the past been immune to cyclical declines, if the cycles in question are sufficiently great. Second, because there may be special characteristics of the new employment which make it particuhlrly vulnerable to the special recessions which lie ahead.

The ominous precedent is 1929-1932. The 1920s were a period of rapid e){pansion in the equivalent of sector II: trade and services together accounted for 77 percent of all new private employment from 1920 to 1929. But JlIany of these jobs were lost after October 1929. From 1929 to 1932, employment in retail trade declined almost as much as did employment in the entire economy, and employment in services also declined substantially. In some services-particularly frivolous ones, like hotels and "amusements"-employment declined even more than it did in the economy as a whole.24

It is also plausible to suppose that sector II employment will be particularly vulnerable even to milder recessions in the 1980s. This is so, above all, to the extent that the ne){t recessions will be accompanied by cuts in civilian government spending. One apparently "recession-proof" sector, state and local government, has already been affected. This sector accounted for over 40 percent of all new public and private employment in 1973-1976 and less than 10 percent from 1976-1979. And other retail and service activities may be affected directly and indirectly by spending cuts. Each of the "Big Three" employment-intensive industries of the 1970s could be vulnerable to a combination of recession and government cutbacks.

The e){pansion of employment in eatirig and drinking places seems to be closely linked to long-term trends; more people live alone (and are far more likely to eat out than are "multiperson households"); more women work (and families with working wives spend more money on eating out). But output in eating and drinking places is also sensitive to changes in real per capita income; it stagnated in 1959-1961, for example, and also in 1973-1974." In the ne){t recession, this sector might behave like the "frivolous" services of the early 1930s. People might treat eating out, even eating hamburgers, as an amusement and not a necessity. There could also be an adverse multiplier effect having to do with the long-term demographic trends. If a recession in the 1980s led to lay-offs of women workers in such "feminine" activities as local government, health services (and eating places themselves), then the demand for meals might contract further.

There might also be tendencies within'the eating and drinking industry which will affect employment. Productivity growth in eating places was much less rapid in the 1970s than in the 1960s, but might increase again. Large chains-notably

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 173

in fast food-are particularly adept at labor-savinginnovations; the pre-frozen portions automatic frying baskets~ and continuous flow broilers which transform cooks into unskilled materials handlers. A recession could lead to the bankruptcy of small restaurants (and even small fast-food chains), and a concentration of employment in more efficient operations. Will the deserted Burger King (or Milkshake Queen) be as common in the 1980s as the closed-down gasoline station of the 1970s?
The boom in business services is also a consequence of persistent trends. Corporations now contract out jobs such as copying, data processing, mailing, cleaning. This is to some extent a function of technological <;hange and the onward march of the division of labor: business uses more data processing, for example, and specialized companies are efficient providers of computer services. But it is also related to social trends. Large corporations may find it easier to send out copying and bring in cleaners; their suppliers are obliged to manage part-time and temporary workers, many of them women.
Business services depend none the less on the overall business environment. In a recession, corporations could retrench, compelling their own employees to do more photocopying, and cutting back on temporary help. Here again, there are small and perhaps vulnerable companies, and many vulnerable short-time employees. There could also be a further multiplier effect, in, for example, the "personnel supply" establishments which provide temporary workers for other business services.
Medical services seem the most inexorable of the three big industries. Americans are getting older and they show few signs of wanting less health care; they are not less sick in a recession. Private health services (which employed some 400,000 people in 1929 compared to five million now) were scarcely affected by the collapse in employment in the 1930s.26 But medical services are also among the private industries which will be most hurt by reductions in civilian government spending.
Senator Richard Schweiker (R-Pa), the SecretaryDesignate of Health and Human Services, has announced an assault on "abuse" in Medicaid, and has said that Medicare could save money if more people were looked after at home. His colleague Senator Pete Domenici (R-NM), the incoming chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, agrees that "nothing's immune-indexed programs, entitlements, the whole works. "27 Such budget cutting could affect employment in all the private activities which have grown up around the semi-private health care system: for example in the millionemployee "nursing and personal care facilitiesubusiness. Here too, as in other services, there are small companies which might go bankrupt. And there are four million women workers,who unemployed might return to unpaid cooking, cleaning, and nursing: the reverse multiplier once more.
The Reaganites are probably right to be preoccupied with an economic "spirit." Marx conveyed the theatrical and irrational character of capitalist inspiration. The Cambridge economist Nicholas Kaldor once criticized Schumpeter's tendency to explain economic growth by recourse to a "stage army of entrepreneurs"; he too conceded the importance of what Keynes called the "animal spirits" of investors.
But the conservatives are dangerously wrong when they invoke an old spirit-"thespirit. . still there"-and old American industries. For changes in the structure of the American economy have brought equivalent changes in expectations, in the structure of entrepreneurial spirits.
The growth of employment in what we called sector II corresponds to persistent social and eCOIiomic tendencies. At a superficial level, we can see that the economic booms of the

1970s were related to the multiple "crises" of American so- 'ciety: eating places and the crisis in the family; business services and the crisis of the corporation. But the expansion of sector II also has deeper origins.
Two of the essential institutions of modern capitalist growth are intimately concerned: the system of reproduction of the labor force, and the corporation. The family, it seems, is increasingly incompetent to sustain the reproduction of educated, healthy workers. Women's work is multiplied by the isolation of small families; women themselves join the commercial labor force; many work for'the small fly-by-night companies of sector II. These problems are exacerbated by the demographic tendency toward an aging popUlation. In 1968, 9.6 percent of the American population was over 65; in 1978 the proportion had increased to 11 percent." And most elderly Americans-unlike Donald Regan (sixty-two), Caspar Weinberger (sixty-five), William French Smith (sixty-two), Ronald Reagan (sixty-nine}-are not chosen for well-paid and respected jobs; many are consigned to the ignominy of "personal care facilities" and the declining family.
At the same time, the corporation is faced with two different assaults. On the one hand, it is ill suited to fulfilling the new needs of the labor force for familial and other services. On the other hand, the sector I monolith of Alfred Sloan's imagination is equally unsuited to employing parttime and temporary workers, young people, old people, and women.
These problems are by no means unique to the United States. Sector II-type employment is increasing throughout the advanced industrial world, although different countries have arrived at different patterns-for replacing the extended family with public or private employment, with the welfare state, or with nursing homes and fast-food restaurants. Mr Reagan's conservative nostalgia for an old industrial spirit is itself not new: he echoes the hopes of (ill-fated) conservatives in two other sector II countries-Thatcher in Britain and Falldin in Sweden.
The capitalist solution, in the long term, will be a new entrepreneurship to "industrialize" sector II. Certain service activities will become far more mechanized; others will be detached from the retail and service sector and reattached to sector IA. We can see the outlines of this process in the electrostatic frying baskets ofthe fast-food industry, or in the instant meals, the panglandular biscuits of Brave New World. In medical services, there will be more institutions' like the Swedish hospital for long-term care, with a swimming pool and comfortable cafeteria, but where the patients were sent to bed early because there 'were too few staff to keep the facilities open.
The industrialized service economy may be dismal. It will evoke capitalist spirits of a different sort: vicious feminine entrepreneurs, Frederick Winslow Taylors of the kitchen and the hospital. The transition to a hUmane post-sector II economy is insome respects the most profound political problem for progressive governments in Europe or, some day, in the United States.
But in Mr Reagan's America, the transitiol) may be cruel in another sense. For it may require the convulsive decline in employment to which we pointed earlier: the disintegration of the existing sector II. The employment boom of the 1970s in the United States was extremely odd. The US is historically far more brutal, in its "normal"levels of unemployment, than are its main competitors. In the 1960s, average unemployment was over three times as high in the US as in Japan, West Germany, or France. In the 1970s, however, unemployment rates increased far less in the US than in these other countries (except Japan). By 1981, unemployment rates in France, West Germany, and Britain will be five times their 1960s levels, but less than twice their 1960s level in the United States."

\

174 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Mr Reagan's initial economic policies are unlikely to bring the high productivity, noninflationary growth he seeks. His nellt set of policies-his nellt economic emergency, not for Inauguration week but for a recession months or years from now-may lead back to even higher levels of unemployment than were previously accepted. The employment expansion of the 1970s, of the Carter year, was bizarre: compassionate, androgynous, not characteristically American. There may be far worse to come.
I Acceptance speech, Republican convention, ihe New York Times, July 16, 1980.
2 US Department of Commerce, Business Conditions Digest, September 1980, Table II FI.
3 Interview with Raymond Barre, Le Monde, November 29,1980.
4 Washingtoll Post, September 10, 1980.
5 Business Week, December I, 1980.
6 Washington Post, September 10, 1980.
7 US Department of Labor, Employment and Earnings, March 1980, Table B-1.
8 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Labour Force Statistics, 1967-1968 (Paris, 1980) and Quarterly Supplement, August 1980.
9 Employment figures for the US, here and what follows, are taken from Employment and Earnings, March 1980, March 1974, and various issues. Tables B-1 and B-2 (except where other sources are given). These figures are derived from data for establishments in the nonagricultural economy. Figures for the summer of 1980 are the average of May, June, and July 1980, from Employment and Earnings, August 1980.
10 Figures from motor vehicles and equipment (Standard Industrial Classification code 371), steel (SIC 331), and iron and steel foundries (SIC 332) are from 1979, before the current recession. Employees in the auto and steel industries work far longer hours than do employees in eating and drinking places. But even in terms of hours worked, the increase in eating and drinking places exceeds total hours for motor vehicles and equipment.
II Figures for the employment of women are from Employment and Earnings, March 1980, Table B-3. For gross hours and earnings of production workers, Employment and Earnings, March 1980 and March 1974, Table C-2. Earnings in 1972 dollars are deflated by the consumer price index for urban wage earners, US Department of Labor, Monthly Labor Review, August 1980 Table 22.
12 "The Input-Output Structure of the US Economy, 1972," US Department of Commerce, Survey of 'Current BUSiness, February 1979, Table 3, "Commodity-by-Industry Direct Requirements." Medical services are grouped with educational and social services.
13 OECD, Labour Force Statistics, 1967-1978 (Paris, 1980). By "services" we understand, for the United States, activities within the US industrial classification "services": hotels; personal services; business and repair services; amusements; health, educational, and other proressional services. This definition is, of course, much narrower than one which includes under "services" all activies which do not produce goods.
14 Here and in what follows employment figures are taken from Employment and Earnings, as above. Output figures for the private nonagricultural economy, in constant 1972 dollars, are from the Department of Commerce's series "Gross National Product by Industry in Constant Dollars," Survey of Current Business, May 1980 and July 1979, Table 6.2; and The National Income alld Product Accoullts of the United States, 1929-1974, Statistical Tables (Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 1977), Table 6.2. The national income and product accounts are in the process of being revised; published figures are used here. It is worth noting that the measurement of productivity in service activities poses very serious problems, and that the derivation of price deflators for different industries also requires stalwart assumptions.
15 Our illustrations, and the ones that follow, are not of course intended to be realistic. Similar calculations using total hours worked instead of number of employees, although no more realistic, would yield broadly comparable results. Thus output per hour worked in a hypothetical 1978N, where hours worked increased from 1973 to 1978 in the same "normal" sectoral proportion as in 1949-1969, would yield an increase in output per hour worked of 1.278 percent per year from 1973 to 1978N, as compared to the actual 1.120 percent. Figures for hours worked are ,from Survey of

, Current Business, July 1979, Table 6.11, and The National Income , alld Prodllct Accounts, op. cit., Table 6.11.
i6"S~veral well-known studies minimize "shift" effects. Thus Edward
Denison ("Explanations of Declining Productivity Growth," in Survey ofCurrent Bllsiness , August 1979) suggests that the shift in hours worked to services had "trivial" consequences in 1966-1976; he concludes that most of the decline in productivity in 1973-1976 must be attributed to a negative "residual" to be loosely identified,
presumably, with the regress of knowledge. An OECD study of seven countries, using more recent data, also concludes that sectoral shifts in employment had little effect on growth of output per employed person. ("Sectoral Shifts and ProducLivity Growth," in OECD, Economic Outlook, Paris, July 1979, pp. 28-35.) But this study groups services into a compendious sector of "other activities" which also includes such high productivity and high productiviLy growth industries as communications and finance, insurance and real estate. For a more convincing view, see Lesler Thurow, "The ProductiVity Problem," in Technology Review, November/ December 1980.

17 US Department of Labor, MOII/hly Labor Review, August 1980, Tables 31 and 33.

18 The New York Times, July 16,1980.

19 OECD, Economic Outlook, July 1979, p. 29.

20 OECD, Lab()urForceStatistics, 1967-1978 (Paris, 1980).

21 Consumer Price Index in Historical Statistics ofthe United States to 1970 (US Department of Labor, Washington, DC, 1975), series E-135; and Monthly Labor Review, August 1980, Table 22.

22 The US government counts as "defense products industries": Ordnance, communication equipment, aircraft and paris. and guided missiles. Figures for defense products industries and Defense De- ,partment employment in 1967 and the first half of 1'980 are from the Department of Commerce, Defense Indicators, August 1968, Appendix B, Table 3; and Business Conditions Digest, September 1980, Tables II D2, 570, 577, and 578.
23 US Department of Labor, Employment and Earnings, March 1980 and August 1980, Table B-1.

24 Sectoral employment figures, Employment and Earnings, March

1980; Table B-1; industry employment, 1929-1932, The National

Income and Product Accounts, op. cit., Table 6.7.

'

25 Richard B. Carnes and Horst Brand, "PrQductivity and New Technology in Eating and Drinking Places", Monthly Labor Review, September 1977. Also, Department of Labor, Productivity Indexes for Selected Industries, 1978 (Washington, DC, 1978), Table 138.

26 The Natianal Income and Product Accounts, op. cit., Table 6.7.

27 The New York Times, December 13, 1980.

28 OECri, Labour Force Statistics, 1967-1978 (Paris, 1980).

29 OECD figures, including forecasts for 1981; New York Times,'Dec.

23,1980.

',

Mr BARRY JONES-The, conservative

columnist George F. Will picked up Emma

Rothschild's point in Newsweek of 16 February

1981 where he wrote:

.

Last week Reagan referred to America as 'this once great industrial giant'. Two days earlier General-Motors, the dominant corporation in America's emblematic industry, had announced that in 1980, for the first time since 1921, it lost money. Chrysler probably now has more debts than assets: a negative net worth. Reagan also referred to the second symbol of American industrialism: steel. But golden arches, not blast furnaces, are becoming the symbols of American enterprise. Today McDonald's has more employees than United States Steel. This 'once great industrial giant' used to make big locomotives, big Buicks. Now it makes Big Macs.

The Economist of 3 January 1981 pointed to the phenomenon that in the years 1970-76 when 9 million new jobs were created in America, 6 million were added by small' businesses, while

\ Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 175

there was no net increase at all made by the: 'Fortune 1,000' companies-that is, the thousand companies with the highest annual turnover.,
Retreating from the global scene and the American picture back to Australia, this has to be said: Compared with other technologically advanced nations, Australia appears to be mildly retarded. To our national disgrace we have cut back on essential investment in research and development so that our per capita spending each year is only ,a miserable proportion of expenditure in the United States, Japan, Britain, West Germany and France. We have the worst informed legislature in the world on scientific and technical matters, lacking the resources or the intellectual vitality to initiate a national debate on where we are going or how we are getting there. We have thrown away priceless intellectual capital, partly through the brain drain and partly through the criminal wastage of human resources in our school systems where 70 per cent of students drop out of our state schools after the compulsory minimum leaving age is reached. We have gazed blankly into the middle distance as our school system fails to meet the needs of students themselves, of society or the economy generally.
I am very glad to see the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) at the table. I only hope that after I have spoken he will make, some reply.
Mr Bradfield-That is a State responsibility.
Mr BARRY JONES-We cannot in the twentieth century rely on the States to provide the intellectual capital that will carry this country through to the end of the twentieth century.
Mr Bradfield-But you have to abide by the Constitution---;--
Mr BARRY JONES-Constitutionality notwithstanding, our standards have to be set nationally and the voters of Australia will cometo recognise this. A century ago Australian States were among the first places on earth with compulsory primary education. We did not have a Commonwealth then. No one would claim we are world leaders in education now.
In the 1980 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development economic survey on Australia, this country ranked fourteenth of the 23 nations listed for educational retention rates for young people aged 15 to 19 years. Turkey and a few other countriesin the Third World were behind us. The Williams Committee of Inquiry into Education, Training and Employment 1979 found that in New South Wales, 17 per cent of 15-yearolds were not able to read or could only read 'at a level below satisfactory comprehension of simple

passages' and a further 32 per cent were reading 'at levels of comprehension below the competence required for a fully literate adult life'. That 49 per cent would have had its supposed basic training in literacy under the Government of Sir Robert Askin. By the time the Labor Government came in under Neville Wran, it was too late to change the situation. However, 49 per cent of 15-yearolds have defective literacy. Similarly the Williams report confirmed that overall about 25 per' cent of school leavers lack sufficient competence in reading, writing and numeration.
Obviously we have lost the capacity to feel shocked by these appalling figures. The debate on the Williams report in the House of Representatives in 1979 lasted less than 30 minutes. There were two speakers-the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). The debate was then adjourned and never resumed throughout the life of the Thirty-first Parliament. That is appalling.
Our abject failure in educational planning points up the class and regional biases in our education system. The urban middle classarticulate, influential and affluent-has access to superior education and has little interest in the under-achievers. The urban and rural classes lack the motivation, skills and fight-back capacity and their children are the victims of our system. But educational failure is not just visited on the children of the poor. It has national significance as well. Just as some primitive peoples, the anthropologists tell us, failed to grasp the relationsp.ip between sexual intercourse and pregnancy, in the same way the economic and social Neanderthals who run our nation see no connection between the nature and quality of education generally and the capacity to innovate and develop new forms of enterprise.
In the United States during the last fortnight I have been looking at high technology industries. It is no accident that the two geographical areas of the greatest technological innovation with the largest number of new firms created are in the Santa Clara Valley, generally called Silicon Valley around Pillo Alto near San Francisco, and in the Waltham area on Route 128 west of Boston. Boston has probably the greatest concentration of intellectual capital in the world, including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard University, Boston University and BrandeisUniversity. It is no accident that Hewlett Packard, Polaroid, Honeywell, Wang, Prime, Digital and many other high technology industries are set up in the Boston area. Similarly, Silicon Valley, with Intel, Fairchild, Xerox, Jacquard, National and Kennedy, has an umbilical link with Stanford

176 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

University and the University of California at Berkeley. These high technology industries have also been highly dependent on the stimulus of government funding largely through defencebased work. The growth of high technology industries in Texas, Minnesota and Colorado, but in not too many of the other 50 States, has depended on three elements: Government funding, the presence of universities, and a solid and expanding intellectual base.
In Australia we put far too much emphasis on the raw material to be dug out of the ground and too little on that found beneath the skull and between the ears. We have been told often enough that we are in an internationally competitive race but the Fraser Government has failed to grasp the extent of the prevailing economic and technological revolution. We have missed the bus in the computer industry and we will be noncompetitors in biotechnology unless we initiate national policies now. However, we have also failed to grasp that new technologies are not, on the whole, large employers. Of course, in their infancy they have high growth rates as employers but as total employers computers and biotechnology will not be large relative to the value of their output. Biotechnology will largely make products and carry out industrial processes which are in substitution for existing products and processes and not in addition to them. But they will have significantly lower inputs of labour, capital equipment, energy and raw materials. They are prodigious producers but small employers. Unfortunately, while there are rich rewards for being first or second in developing key industries so that the world's markets can be penetrated and won there is absolutely no advantage in being eighteenth or thirty-second in line. There is a mixture of comedy and pathos in current British attempts to 'get with' the micro electronics revolution while Sir Keith Joseph explains to bankers why they should invest in microtechnology, 15 or 20 years too late.
A number of urgent measures must be taken and they must be taken by the thirty-second Parliament. First, it must stop .and reverse the winding down of public education and provide opportunities for working class children. Second, it must encourage the development of intellectual capital for its own sake and wherever it leads. Third, it must double public investment in research and development in the life of this Parliament. Fourth, it must set up an office of technology assessment as has been done by the United States Congress to provide independent arm's

length advice to the Parliament. Fifth, a joint parliamentary committee on science and technology should be set up.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley) (9.23)-The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has done me a service by drawing attention to some of the problems facing this country. It is a matter of very great regret that the solutions which he proposes to the problems are the same tired, old Australian Labor Party solutions. I ask honourable members just to recall what those solutions were. Firstly, there was increased expenditure on public education; secondly, increased public investment In research; thirdly, the establishment of yet another govern~ ment department to solve some of these problems; and, fourthly, the establishment of another parliamentary committee. It is a matter of great distress to me and to people on this side of the House that the Labor Party cannot sit down for once and think about what free individuals can do by using their initiative.
It is on that general matter that I wish to make some remarks tonight. I do so because the Governor-General's Speech provides an opportunity for a government to state its objectives and programs for the next three years. But it does more than that. It provides an opportunity for the Government to state its philosophy and its basic principles and it provides an opportunity for honourable members of this House to say where they stand in regard to that philosophy and those principles. It is not in pinpointing the problems where I would disagree with the honourable member for Lalor. It is the solutipn to those problems and the philosophy that a government should adopt as it sets out to solve those problems. I wish at the outset to refer to the Speech of the Governor-General where he mentioned a society which maximises the rewards of individual effort and initiative and which also respects the right .of individuals to shape their own lives. I refer also to the Speech of the Governor-General where he had this to say:
During the life of this Parliament, therefore, my Government will be making a serious and sustained effort to explain to the Australian people the philosophy on which it bases its approach to governing-a philosophy which it sees as liberal in its principles, flexible and undogmatic in its application of those principles to the realities of Australian life and conservative in its distrust of abrl\pt and sweeping changes as a means of achieving desired ends.
That is the Government's philosophy and it is ,a statement of the Government's position on the most basic question that any government should ask itself and which it should keep asking itself while it remains in government. The question is this: Should a government be concerned above all

\
\
\
Governor-General's Speech

25 Febrl)ary 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 177

to control, to regulate, to manage and to provide or should it be concerned to allow the individual the maximum freedom to determine his own life, not only in economic or commercial activities but also in every area of human endeavour. It is the latter proposition which is the Government's philosophy and it is the latter proposition which is my philosophy. When Sir Robert Menzies surveyed the sorts of problems that the honourable member for Lalor was looking at tonight he said: 'The right answer is to set the individual free'.
In 1949 the right answer was to set the individual free and that answer remains the right answer today. It is not a changing proposition but a permanent principle. It remains the correct solution today because basic principles of philosophy never change. The policies may change, the minutiae of implementing the policies may change but the basic principle remains the same. The basic principle-the principle to which this Government subscribes and the principle to which I subscribe-is that the right answer is to set the people free. If the Labor Party would think for a moment about that solution it might find a more ready and more practical solution to some of the problems to which the honourable member for Lalor was drawing attention tonight. But one may ask: Why should this principle be endowed with so much virtue? It is because governments are trustees. Governments are trustees of power and that power is given to them by the people. In the context of the present taxation debate the Government is a trustee of the people's money which is given to it.
Governments have no power that they can assume as of right. They have no more power than is temporarily entrusted to them by the people. Free people do not surrender their freedom to a government. They give on trust a limited power to govern in the interests of the people and the power to perform only those functions that individuals cannot perform themselves. Like many trusts the power surrendered can always be withdrawn and no government should forget that. Those are principles to which the Federal Government subscribes. But like all governments this Government needs to be encouraged to stick to those principles. It needs to be encouraged to put them into practice. The more demands that we in this House make on the Government to increase its activities, to involve itself in more and more activities that can well be left to the individual, the more we make it harder for the Government to subscribe, to carry out and to practice this highly desirable principle and philosophy upon which it is based.

My speech is concerned firstly with making a plea and, I hope, giving some sort of encouragement to the Government to put its philosophy into practice; to put into practice the philosophy that was set out so clearly by the GovernorGeneral in his Speech. Secondly, I hope that I can suggest some areas where a more principled approach can be taken. I will give several examples of this sort of thing. One such example is poverty. We have heard a lot about poverty in recent times and there seems to be a lot of very well-meaning people studying the question of poverty, quite often at our expense. Undoubtedly, there is some poverty in Australia. Poverty will remain as long as the poor are encouraged in their poverty. The more mendicancy that a government encourages the more it will encourage the permanent poor to
remain exactly that-the permanent poor.
One can give many examples of this process. We find that in the last Budget $139m was appropriated for welfare housing alone and $109m for rental housing. Without getting into an argument with members of the Labor Party about this, I simply ask them to consider these questions:
Should we continue with this sort of scheme and this sort of expenditure? Should we be encouraging the poor to remain poor? Should we be encouraging the people who need welfare housing to continue to need welfare housing? Should we encourage people, as we do in so many of these programs, to be dependent on the State and to remain dependent on the State? By providing money for rental housing, should we continue to encourage people to remain tenants, whether of the Government, if the Government owns the housing, or of a private landlord, it matters not. So long as we continue to provide funds of this sort, so long as we encourage medicancy, we will encourage people to remain in exactly that state. If we give people some encouragement to lift themselves out of that state, if we given them some encouragement and incentive and reward to acquire their own homes and to leave that state of being a tenant and a mendicant, then they will prosper and benefit from that encouragement.
One could go on to consider the whole area of
social welfare payments. One could stand here all night and go through them one after the. other. Of course, those payments are made available from the very best motives. This Government has the highest of motives in its concern for the poor, for those who are in need of social welfare payments. But we must stop occasionally and think about the proposition that the more people who are eligible for social welfare then the more this mendicant attitude is spread throughout the community, and encouraged to spread. The only way

178 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

to stop destroying the society in that way is to encourage people to stand on their own feet and rely on their own initiative and self-help.
There is another broad area in relation to government solutions to problems which we should occasionally stop and think about, to consider just where we are going and whether we are acting consistently with the basic principles and basic philosophy to which we subscribe. The area to which I want to address some few remarks relates to the way in which problems are solved today. Too often it seems that we fall into a pattern. The first stage of the pattern is that we isolate the problem, as the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) did earlier this evening. Secondly, we appoint an inquiry to investigate the problem and try to find some solution. Thirdly, and I regret all too often, our solution is to establish a government body to control the problem. Then we appoint ari advisory body to advise the government body that is doing the controlling, and so the pattern goes on. That is not the way to solve the sorts of problems that we have been highlighting tonight. It is not the way to solve those problems permanently.
Too often we completely ignore a different and, I would suggest, better approach; that is, to leave the problem to natural forces and the activities of free men and women, who through their own efforts and activities and initiatives can solve so many problems which we seem to think, with our intellectual arrogance, can be solved only by government bodies, only by the sort of bureaucracy that the honourable member for Lalor earlier this evening said he wanted to establish and even expand. Let us think about it for a moment. The inventiveness of free men and women gave us the great inventions of history, took us through the age of enlightenment, the Renaissance, the Industrial Revolution. Surely those forces of freedom are still powerful enough to solve the sorts of problems that today we think can be solved only by government bodies and government bureaucracies? Surely there is enough initiative and incentive still there, enough motivating force to make the society better and stronger? It is there. All we have to do is tap the efforts of individual free men and women.
A further step in this evolution to which we should address ourselves is the establishment of government bodies to perform what in many cases are very worthwhile functions. Those bodies have a natural tendency to become permanent. They become monopolies. In many cases they cost enormous amounts of money. I regret to say that in many cases they are unsuccessful in solving the problems they have been set up to solve. Of

course, in many cases they run at an enormous loss. What is the result of it all? The result is that the problem is not solved, the society becomes no better, but the free men and women who go to makeup the society and who create the wealth are called on to pay even more in taxation, to give up even more of the wealth that they create in order to keep this machine going. Unfortunately, in many cases, all that is to no avail.
Again, one could stand here all night and detail examples of this, but let me give just one. I was privileged to read recently the annual report of the Australian National Railways Commission, which no doubt is a very worthwhile body performing a very worthwhile task under difficult circumstances, with the combined tyrannies of distance and the railway unions. In those circumstances the Commission probably gets by quite well. It is interesting to read the Commission's accounts because they provide a frank illustration of the way in which some government bodies approach their tasks. Towards the end of the report it is stated that the operating loss for the year ended 30 June 1980 was $64m. Under that entry another item states that the Commonwealth subsidy to meet the operating loss was $58m. The net loss, and this is the miracle result, was only $6m. This government bureaucracy-I do not mean that in a pejorative sense, but it is a bureaucratic area of government-with the stroke of an accountant's pen has converted a loss of $64m into a loss of $6m. That is a remarkable effort. The report should be sent to the archives of the Cambridge University as an extraordinary contribution to human knowledge.
What would happen if this were a private body? What would the shareholders say? What would the people who invested their money in it say on finding that their organisation had suffered a loss of $64m? They would be horrified and the organisation would probably go out of business. But that is the approach, and as a government, because it is a government responsibility, we must make it plain to the Australian people that, in a way in which I think at the moment they do not understand, there is an enormous difference between private enterprise and public enterprise. It is hard to engage in business, hard to start a business, hard to get a job in business, hard to keep that job, hard to get a market, and hard to make a profit. In the public sector the market is there, the work is there, the job is permanent, and the superannuation is extensive. We must understand that here is the nub of the whole problem. We must get back to an understanding of what really makes the world go round. If I have a serious criticism to make of the honourable member for Lalor-I

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 179

hope in a charitable way-it is that he and his colleagues in the Labor Party do not understand that there are people who have real needs which can be met by their going out and working, that people have aspirations, both material and otherwise, which they can achieve and want to achieve. They want to achieve those things by going out and fighting for them themselves. It is unfortunate that the Labor Party's solution to this sort of problem is not a solution that can be found in the real world.
In the few minutes remaining to me I will list a number of courses we can follow. I cannot speak about them at length, but each of them is worth while considering. In the first place, we can encourage free men and women to make more of their own decisions about their own lives and
about how they use and dispose of the wealth they create. I repeat that it is free men and women who create wealth; it is not governments that create wealth. Secondly, all of us in this Parliament, both on this side of the House and on the other side, can cease our demands on government to solve our problems, to involve itself in more areas where we believe governments can solve problems. Thirdly, we can be compassionate, and compassion at all times, to those who cannot help themselves. We can help those who really need help and assistance. Above all, we can put the emphasis in social welfare on need and provide help only to those who need it. If we do not follow that principle then every taxpayer, every individual man and woman in the country, will suffer. If they do not receive the social welfare benefits they will pay for them through their taxes. Fourthly, we can keep government expenditure down by exactly that means. We can continue to examine the areas of government' expenditure and find economies. If we do that everyone will benefitevery taxpayer, every man and woman in Australia.
Fifthly, we can continue in particular to lessen the tax burden of individuais. One must praise the Government for its achievements already in the taxation area and must encourage it to continue with reforms in that area. Obviously, as the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has said-it is the basic point he has been trying to get across and I believe he now is doing so successfully-there cannot be substantial reductions in the rates of personal income tax levied unless there is a substantial reduction in the amount of money that the Government spends. That is a simple proposition and one which people must learn to accept. Sixthly, we can continue our scrutiny of public expenditure and of public involvement in all areas. If we do that we will find new areas which, probably with

the best motives in the world, have been taken over by government but which, nevertheless, if they were returned to the private sector-not just to private companies but to private efforts, to personal initiatives of free men and women-would benefit every Australian and our society and country would be even greater.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (9.40)-1 listened with interest to the attitude towards society expressed by the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown). It occurred to me during his speech that the slogan for Government members will be the word 'free', without definition, without substance and without understanding. The massive social welfare payments reflect the Government's inability to promote a more egalitarian society, to provide a society which offers work for all who want it, to ensure that the cake in Australia is more equitably distributed, and to promote personal initiative and concern for others and not just exploitation. Free men and women need equality of opportunity if that sort of situation is to occur.
I enter this Address-in-Reply debate to support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent), particularly those sections of it which refer to the Government's failure to respond to record levels of unemployment and to reduced and falling family living standards. Earlier in the evening I was pleased to hear the distinguished honourable member for Chilley (Mr Armitage) make reference to the prpblem of youth unemployment in his electorate. I shall refer to youth unemployment and the Community Youth Support Scheme. Initially, I mention a matter to which I am sensitive, not only as a politician but also as a medical practitioner. It is a matter which requires sensitivity. Such sensitivity is not shown by this Government when it concentrates on its macro-economic policies with no regard for human beings. I refer to a paper published in the Australian Family Physician, Volume 9 of December 1980, at page 845 and entitled 'Unemployment and the mental health of adolescents'. It is an article which would bear reading by anyone with the slightest streak of compassion. Here I can only give the essence of what is said in the paper. The author, Dr Robert Kosky, starts with the following Australian Bureau of Statistics statement:
On 1 February 1980, there were 442,400 people registered as unemployed in Australia. One-third of them were aged between 15 and 19 years.
I doubt whether any honourable member would deny that the figures would be higher now. So one-third of the unemployed people are adolescents. The author states:

180 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

In adolescence, the two major psycho-social tasks are the establishment of independence and the consolidation of a sense of personal identity. It should be clear that unemployment can cut directly across the accomplishment of both these tasks.
Yet his further comment could be that, despite unemployment being the major social phenomenon of the past five years, there has been negligible research into its effects on mental health. An inability to demonstrate a capacity to support oneself independently is a shameful experience for young people. The author goes on to discuss intelligently what flows from that and the social debt being amassed for the future. He emphasises that this major social phenomenon largely has escaped careful psychological, social and political analysis. Surely a knowledge of the social and political effects is a matter of concern for this Parliament; yet there is no Government appreciation of that. The author's concluding statement is that the social consequences of the group bonding developed between unemployed young people have not yet been fully appreciated and that social disturbaces of a violent type may result.
Having said that about one of the basic concerns of youth unemployment, let us turn to the Government's record with the Community Youth Support Scheme. In my electorate I have supported that scheme since its inception, although I believed it to be just a band-aid measure; but band-aids do provide comfort for a time. However, I must admit, having watched the scheme in operation, that I can see such a scheme with wider guidelines, even when economic circumstances are better, being of use as a meeting point, as a guiding agency for young people who are not sure where they are going.
In November 1980 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) expressed his Government's . commitment to provide youth employment through various schemes, including the Community Youth Support Scheme. I questioned the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) on this, asking him whether it meant the provision of new finance for new schemes, extra project officers where need was demonstrated, administrative assistance, et cetera. I did that on 4 December. The Minister's reply to the House was over long and I had to read it to see whether there was substance in it. There was none. There was no commitment whatsoever to the scheme. In fact, on searching the Minister's Press releases, I found that his last Press release on the Community Youth Support Scheme was dated 2 January 1980, when he announced an additional grant of $1.6m. I should think that the fact that only one Press statement was issued in some 14 months or

so shows that a high degree of concern or interest is not held by that Minister.
On 3 December 1980 I placed on notice a question directed to the Minister regarding the scheme. I received his reply, or rather his nonreply, on 9 February 1981. Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to have a copy of that question which sought details of the Community Youth Support Scheme and of the Minister's answer refusing to answer incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read asfollows-
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) How many Community Youth Support Schemes have operated since the commencement of the Scheme in (a) each State, (b) the Australian Capital Territory and (c) the Northern Territory.
(2) What is the break-up of these figures for each Federal Electoral Division.
(3) What was the name of each scheme and what was the date of (a) commencement and (b) termination of each where applicable.
(4) How many staff have been employed by each scheme during the last 12 months.
(5) What was the financial allocation to each scheme during the same period.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) This information is not readily available within my Department and to obtain it would take considerable time and effort beyond the normal requirements of administration. For this reason, I do not propose to have officers take time out from their normal duties to seek and collate the great detail and diversity of information sought. If the honourable member desires information about a specific project it can be provided.
Dr JENKINS-I thank the House. It will be noted that in this answer the Minister refused to supply what is very basic information, that is, the names of the schemes that exist, how long they have existed, how many have folded up, and what their financial allocations were. It seems to me that this is basic information that a Minister in charge of such schemes should have at his fingertips. We followed up the question to the Minister with a telephone call to his Department and, as a result, got an immediate answer to nearly 50 per cent of the questions, giving details which he said were too difficult to get. I got the answers to how many projects there were in each State, the moneys allocated to each State, the average allocation per project State by State and the anticipated number of participants in the program in 1980-81. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the table received from the Minister's Department.
Leave granted.
The table read asfollows-

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 181

COMMONWEALTH YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEJ'VIE

Number .of projects-

New South Wales

87

Queensland

34

Victoria . . .

80

South Australia

25

Western Australia

29

Tasmania

21

Northern Territory

2

Total

278

Money allocated for projects-
New South Wales Queensland . Victoria . . . South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

$m
4.028 1.401 3.476 0.851 1.080 0.655 0.059

Total

11.55

Average allocation per project (by State)
New South Wales Queensland . Victoria . . . South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

$ 46,298 41,206 41;205 34,040 37,241 31,190 29,500

Anticipated number of participants 1980-81 financial year: . 50,000 (National)

Dr JENKINS-I thank the House. Having gained that information by a telephone inquiry, I believe it should be only a small step further to get the full information I required from the Minister. What is he trying to hide? Why will he not give
the answers to such simple questions? Surely the

reason is that he is not fair dinkum about the Community Youth Support Scheme. I am particularly concerned about the situation in my electorate. The magnitude of the problem can be illustrated by two tables. One shows the total number of unemployment beneficiaries for the quarter ending 31 December 1980 in postcode districts in my electorate. The other shows the number of unemployment benefit recipients by age in similarly selected postcode districts at 28 November 1980. I seek leave to have those tables incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The tables read asfollows-

TOTAL NUMBER OF UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFICIARIES FOR QUARTER ENDING 31.12.80

Hurstbridge, Arthurs Creek Bundoora, Kingsbury Craigieburn DonnyBrook Mernda, Doreen Whitt1esea, Eden Park, Humevale, Kinglake
West Epping . . . . . . . Greensborough . . . . . Reservoir; Keon Park, Regent Preston, Regent . . . Thomastown, Keon Park Lalor Mill Park Mont Park Watsonia Morang South Woodstock Wollert
YYaanrrYameabnat

3,099 3,083 3,064 3,652 3,754
3,757 3,076 3,088 3,073 3,072 3,074 3,075 3,082 3,085 3,087 3,752 3,751 3,750 3,755 3,091

63 243 54
5 16
64 70 217 1,326 1,062 339 376 31 108 140 25
2 3 3 6

NUMBER OF UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT RECIPIENTS BY AGE IN SELECTED POSTCODES AS AT 28 NOVEMBER 1980

Postcode

Aged under 18 years

18-20 years

21-24 years

25-44 years

45-54 years

55 years and over

Total

3064 3072 3073 ,3074
3075 3076 3082 3083 3085 3087
3088 3091 3099 3652 3750 3751 '
3752 3754 3755 3757

6

8

11

15

7

97

202

162

291

76

128

308

241

312

109

32

74

43

74

25

35

85

70

94

30

7

16

11

15

4

1

10

2

10

1

18

53

48

45

16

10

19

18

18

8

24

28

21

19

1

28

49

40

38

8

4

2

5

12

11

16

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

3

7

5

6

1

2

2

5

2

1

4

12

11

22

5

2

49

52

880

67

1,165

14

262

16

330

3

56

24

14

194

6

79

4

97

5

168

1

7

4

49

4

4

2

22

11

1

3

57

182 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Dr JENKINS-I thank the House and the , 'Once'again, this is not because of the lack of a sub-

Minister for Education (Mr Fife), who is at the stantial case for the need to help these young un-

table, for their courtesy. It is impossible to go employed but because of lack of finance. Once

through those statistics in speaking, but I assure again, if another scheme folds this project will

the House that they show substantial figures in have a chance of being established by a transfer of

various areas. Despite the fact that the last date finance from that scheme. So much for the

available at which the figures were broken down Government's expressed intent and concern to

by age is 28 November, I am sure that honourable help young people gain employment in the com-

members will be able to project the numbers now munity! The concern is only on paper. The a,ction

that the school leavers have hit the lists. The does not occur.

Lalor-Epping-Thomastown Unemployment

Scheme has been operating for the last couple of I had hoped that we might have been able to

years. If honourable members look at the figures form an auxiliary with the co-operation of local

in the tables they will notice that that Scheme has a very heavy load of young unemployed. Late last year the operators of the Scheme applied to the State committee for an extra project officer to do further outreach work with the young unemployed. The application was supported by the Scullin electorate committee and me. I believe that the operators of the Scheme have been advised informally that the application has been refused, not because of lack of need but because of lack of finance. This is despite the Prime Minister's commitment to provide finance for these schemes. In fact, I understand that, if another Community Youth Support Scheme project in Victoria should happen to fold, the LalorEpping-Thomastown Unemployment Scheme would get an extra project officer. But this would depend on another project folding, not on a new initiative. So much for the Government's support in that area!

employers such as operates in the west Heidelberg area which, I think, is in the electorate of the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe). Last week I called a meeting of what I felt were the 200 largest employers in the electorate, plus school careers officers, social workers and politicians. I asked two Community Youth Support Scheme project workers to tell the story of youth unemployment as they saw it. Of more than 200 employers invited, five attended and there were three apologies. So much for the compassion and concern of local industry for the area from which it gets its custom and makes its living. Can honourable members wonder that I listened to the honourable member for Diamond Valley with some bemusement about the attitudes of free men and women. They are free to do what? They are free to do without work and to starve. They are certainly not getting equal opportunity. So much for compassion and concern! I must, however, compliment the five employer representatives

who attended. They have been most helpful and

In the last ye;:tr it became evident to me that in co-operative. They have shown an understanding

the Bundoora-Watsonia area there was not only a of the problem. They were not necessarily right on

substantial overt youth unemployment situation beam but, because they talked to some of the

but also a great deal of hidden youth unemployyoung people and project officers, they gained

ment because of a certain perception of social some understanding. They showed a willingness

status. A well-attended public meeting was held to discuss and advise and to have the young

at which an interim committee composed of conpeople and project officers examine the situation

cerned citizens, clergymen and school careers in industry just as they were prepared to look at

officers was set up for the purpose of establishing the projects and articulate their problems as well

a new Community Youth Support Scheme as those of the project officers. Their interest is

project. Those concerned with that committee, certainly at a much higher level than that of the

some of whom were not necessarily convinced of Minister. Is he letting the CYSS run down with

the numbers of unemployed when they joined the this lack of concern?

committee, found that the extent of the perceived

situation was worse than had been at first thought. Another problem in the area, which arose at the

However, the extent could not be clearly defined same meeting, is the Special Youth Employment

without a formal structure being set up. AppliTraining Program. Young people are trained in

cation was made to the State committee to set up skills. The Government subsidises the employers.

a CYSS project. I also supported that application. But what use is this program if fewer than one

The State committee recommendation went to third of those who take part in it are able to obtain

the Minister last week. No formal answer has jobs after they finish their stint with a particular

been received. Once again, there is informal inforcompany? Once again we have a useless youth

mation that the request cannot be acceded to. training program which does not get down to

Governor~General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 183

basic needs. That substantially covers some of the aspects of the problem of youth unemployment. .
In rounding off my discussion of that subject, I return to my first proposition, that the young unemployed-these in the 15 to 20 age groupare adolescents in their formative years. It is a time in which their niche in society is stamped and shaped. Unless we show concern and compassion, future governments will face very grave problems.
I wish now to refer briefly to a campaign conducted throughout Victoria in January with regard to emergency relief. It showed clearly that most people who required emergency relief were receiving social security benefits. Thus, emergency relief was being used to subsidise pensions, not to meet real emergencies. Unfortunately, government members who knew about this campaign, in which some of the employees ofth~ State social welfare department were concerned, complained to the State Minister because those officers showed compassion. That is disgraceful. We had better take a look at oureniergency relief programs to ensure that they are true emergency relief programs.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (10.2)-1 am very pleased to have the opportunity tonight to speak in the Address-in-Reply debate to the speech by His Excellency, the Governor-General on the occasion of the opening of the Thirty-second Parliament. Last October some 76 per cent of the people in my electorate voted to support this Government. They voted to maintain the basic thrust of the policies that have been followed over the last five years. I quote the words from His Excellency's speech:
These policies are designed to work for the well-being of all Australians and to develop a society which maximises the rewards of individual effort and initiative, and which also respects the right of individ~als to shape their own lives.
I wish this evening to devote my time to what I regard as Australia's greatest national resource, the Murray River basin. It has been claimed by some historians that River Murray problems, which were already claiming a good deal of attention from about 1880 onwards, accelerated the advent of Federation in 1901. Conflicts between the States were then developing on the use of River Murray water for irrigation, to the possible detriment of navigation requirements in the river. These sorts of interstate problems were cited as examples of the type of impasse which the proponents of Federation sought to overcome. Therefore, from the earliest days of its existence the Commonwealth has manifested an interest in River Murray matters which reflected a realisation that water conservation and associated land

development, based on the river, would eventually be of national importance. It also reflected the Commonwealth's concern for interstate trade implications relating to water borne traffic. Over many years numerous proposals have been put forward for multi-government control of the River Murray. Many noteworthy meetings, in which the Commonwealth took part, were held to explore the development of practical formulae for that purpose. Among these was the meeting in 1902 of the Interstate Royal Commission and the interstate conference of engineers, held in 1913. Agreement was finally reached in 1914. Enabling legislation came into effect in 1915 and the River Murray Commission was established in 1917. It is now time that the Commonwealth Government and the States sought to remove the other barriers that threaten the long term viability of this nation's most valuable asset. Of course, pre-dating these long and involved discussions, by millions of years, were even more involved natural processes of land formation. These resulted in much of the Murray Valley being created on a former sea bed. The underground salt content of this part of the Murray Valley remained more or less dormant until it was activated by substantial increments being made to the underground water table as a result of irrigation development in recent times. It is obvious that these geomorphic facts will determine fundamentally the extent to which salinity problems in the Murray Valley can be mitigated. All evidence seems to suggest that at best we will have to develop strategies for coping with these problems. Economically, and perhaps technically, we cannot hope to overcome the'm completely.
The question, then, is what can realistically be done and should be done to solve the problems inherent in the complexities of Murray River water usage. Because of its importance to the economy of the region and indeed of Australia, the River Murray must continue to be a source of irrigation and of industrial and domestic supplies but, short of duplicating its supply function at a prohibitive cost, it will also have to continue to be a drain for run-off from the catchment. After all, that is part of a river's natural function. However, it must be done without the connotation often associated with drains. We have to ensure that the quality of the run-off is maintained at an acceptable level for human consumption and other beneficial uses along the river.
In 1979, when for the first time the Commonwealth Government clearly enunciated its water policy, it identified as one of the cardinal points of its strategy for assisting the States to deal with

184 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

their immediate water problems, the encouragement of management practices which would reduce trends towards the deterioration of water quality and associated land resources. At the farm level this objective may be slowly being achieved as a result of recent amendments to the Income Tax Assessment Act, which have liberalised concessions for income tax assessment purposes in respect of on-farm investment in water conveyance and storage. This will encourage the installation of irrigation systems which reduce excess watering, a factor contributing to high water tables. Hand in hand with these measures will go the financial support available for on-farm improvement of farming practices and management. It goes without saying that the best way to keep salt out of the river is to put as little as possible into it.
I would like to mention, in regard to the. improvement of salinity levels by farm practices the problem that some of us are having in north-west Victoria and southern New South Wales in relation to a government duty on the importation of lasers used in land levelling. My colleague, the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) and I have been endeavouring for some time to -have the Government re-assess a regulation which restricts the importation duty free of laser land levelling equipment. Lasers are being used effectively in the rehabilitation and improvement of layout of irrigation farms. A Queensland manufacturer has claimed that he can produce lasers which can be used for this purpose but his claim cannot be substantiated. Agricultural work requires a rotating laser, unlike the fixed lasers used in construction which have no application to agriculture. Despite requests by land owners, these manufacturers have not been able. to supply the needed lasers or even to provide a test demonstration. At present some 200 lasers, at a cost of some $15,000 to $20,000, are being used in northern Victoria. This gives some idea of the expanding use of these new methods. I therefore ask the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) to reassess the duty that is placed on lasers in an 'endeavour, in one way, to reduce the salinity in our River Murray system.
At government level,Commonwealth assistance to the three States for salinity control and drainage works in the Murray Valley and supp!Jrt for a new River Murray Waters Agreement to take account of water quality in the river are further clear manifestations that this objective is being pursued, but not, however, with the vigour commensurate with the seriousness of the problem. Proposed changes to the River Murray Waters Agreem'ent provide a suitable mechanism for resolving the conflicting functions of the river.

I On' particular aspect of the proposed new agreelnent to which I would like to draw the attention of the House, and which I believe is at the heart of the resolution of this conflict of functions, is the particular new responsibility proposed for the River Murray Commission; namely, the formulation of water quality objectives and, where appropriate, standards for various parts of the River Murray, and to make recommendations in respect thereto to the governments concerned. I think the successful results of this are indicated by the fact that already a water quality monitoring program has been instituted by the River Murray Commission to provide data essential for the improved water quality management of the river. This program, which comprises about 32 stations located on the main stem of the river and the lower ends of the tributaries, has now been running for two years. In addition to salinity, some 20 other water quality parameters are being measured. Whilst they are probably less critical than salinity, a number of other water quality characteristics of the Murray are of concern and need to be monitored.
I believe there is a means for seeking the active collaboration of the States in undertaking action where it is appropriate in all aspects of man's activities in the region which could influence these objectives. As we recognise, these activities could be hundreds of kilometres from the-river and in such varied fields as forestry, industrial development and agriculture. It is obvious that the utmost goodwill will be required from the three States and the Commonwealth because the matters to which I have referred have a very'real potential for influencing water quality objectives or standards and are completely State constitutional responsibilities. Implementing the River Murray Commission's recommendations on water quality may require the States to take a broader national viewpoint rather than one confined to their own sovereign interests.
It is sad to say that to date evidence of such a response has been disappointing. I mention one example of where it has been most disappointing. It is in the New South Wales Government's policy of continuing to grant diversion licences on western flowing streams which enter the River Murray basin. Despite the fact that the South Australian and Victorian governments have asked for a moratorium on the issue of-these licences, whereby some many thousands of hectares of land have been put under irrigation,. or have been recommended to be put under irrigation, the New South Wales Government. has not placed a moratotium on the issue of licences but rather it

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 185

lor appears to be anxious to grant as many water li-
cences as possible before the new power~ the River Murray Commission are ratified. Ata recent public meeting in Mildura a senior officer of the Engineering and Water Supply Department of South Australia stated that during the months of October, November and December 1980, 28 per cent of the Murray River salt load entering South Australia originated in the Darling River. I am pleased to see the honourable member for Hawker agrees with me.
Mr Jacobi-Yes, I do.
Mr FISHER-This letter, from the Premier of New South Wales, states:
. . . only 2 per cent of the salt input comes from New South Wales, with 98 per cent reaching the river from Victorian and South Australian lands.
I think .this indicates the parochial attitude being taken by some of the State governments towards solving some-of these major problems of the Murray Valley basin. I must stress that in carrying out its water quality. responsibilities the River Murray Commission will have only the power of persuasion. Legal sanctions have not and never have been suggested to enforce compliance with the Commission's recommendations. To date, the collaboration of the four governments in the implementation of the River Murray Waters Agreement has been a single example of co-operation to the mutual advantage of all concerned. It is likely that the proposed new water quality responsibilities for the Commission will-quite likely rise to intrastate and interstate conflicts of interest, thereby generating pressures on the goodwill established over the past 60 years of the Agreement. I hope sincerely that governments rise to the occasion, despite the complexity of the task they have set themselves of agreeing to water quality responsibility for the River Murray Commission.
As I have said, progress towards a new agreement has been slower than anticipated and I am looking forward to finding out details of the progress that is supposed to have taken place in a recent meeting between Commonwealth and State Ministers. The River Murray Commission does not have the broad constitutional framework necessary to enable it to handle effectively all water ,quality problems in the basin. I hope the Commonwealth and States make considerable progress in dealing with these matters on a bilateral basis outside the Commission's charter. We are all aware that the Maunsell report, commissioned by the four governments, recommended a series of works and measures to help cope with immediate problems but I think we all should recognise that the Maunsell report only established priorities for those projects already

proposed by State governments. That committee WaS not asked to, nor did it, attempt to investigate proposals considered to be of a more long term nature.
We have to be concerned about and recognise the fact that the River Murray system is being used beyond its capacity -in a situation which reverses its natural flow, resulting in a conflict between storage operational procedures to give maximum irrigation benefits on the one hand, and to mitigate flooding on the other. There are demands for more water for irrigation, with a corresponding potential for further river bank erosion and irreversible damage to the natural river environment. Many of these conflicts are predictable consequences of controlling natural processes. Land salinisation, waterlogging, river bank erosion and the impairment of water quality with associated social imd economic implications are some of the results of these conflicts in water and associated land uses. Urgent steps are necessary to avoid these serious thre\lts to Australia's most productive irrigated region and its most successful 'closer settlement venture on a national scale. Priorities have to be given to works and measures which have as their main objective the consolidation of existing urban and rural settlements, the protection of existing infrastructure and the stabilisation of existing rural enterprises,
Our four governments and their departments need only the will to support a significant national project and make a commitment. All of us can visually assess the damage caused by piecemeal remedial measures that transmit the problems of one district to another. We have to ensure measures to prevent the factors that seriously threaten the important ecology of our region, that contribute to saline drainage water entering the river and that restrict an adequate minimum flow for the length of the Murray necessary to prevent high salinity levels. In the past Australia has responded well to developing its natural resources. A series of reports have been made by highly competent people. There is no doubt that lack of action has overtaken many proposed measures considered satisfactory at the time. However, one thing is obvious in most of the reports. They have all been conducted with restraints. Sometimes it is political restraint, sometimes it is financial restraint arid sometimes without sufficient scope for inquiry.
I draw attention to the environmental statement of stage I of the Tyrrell scheme. This inquiry is restricted to overall river improvement because the objective for the proposed works is to control any detriment to river quality attributable

186 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Governor-General's Speech

to works under construction in the Shepparton region. It is restrictive for financial reasons because, despite the alternative of piping water to the ocean receiving acceptance, it has not been recommended. It is also restrictive because understandably it has been assessed relative to proposals for the possible transmission of saline water to Tyrrell at a later stage. Throughout its history the Murray Valley has made a very substantial contribution to the economic' development of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, and of course to Australia at large. River water quality, particularly in respect of salinity, has b~ come a key factor in the long term utilisation of this nation's most important water resources.
The answer to the questions addressed by me tonight and by many others in 'the past depend on many complex factors. However, there is a clear willingness on the part of all concerned to examine closely all the factors significantly affecting river management. I believe that there also has to be a clear willingness on the part of all governments involved. I have no doubt that, in the current climate of awareness of the delicate balance within the ecosystem of the region, the River Murray will remain the lifeline of the river system, carrying supplies from its vast storages for the efficient rural industries and urban centres in the valley. It will remain as a drain for a productive hinter-land. I hope that it will always be an ever renewable delight for the tens of thousands of Australians who return to the river for relaxation and recreation.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (lO.21)-The Governor-General's Speech emphasises the coalition's continuing commitment to conservative philosophy and programs. This commitment has as its basic principles firstly a commitment to private enterprise or market economics and, secondly, a limitation on the power of government. With these basic commmitments the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) links the Australian Government's political and economic philosophy with those of conservative governments in the United States, Britain and a numberof European countries. The Governor-General, in his Speech, said:
But my Government does believe profoundly that it is vitally important that the power and functions of the State should be limited and contained. It does believe that the' State is likely to be in many ways an inefficient and wasteful provider and that many services can be better supplied in other ways. And it does believe that the expansion of private enterprise is the best means to achieve the well-being and health of a society.
The philosophy which is implicit in the GovernorGeneral's Speech was dealt with at greater length in an address which I understand was read by

Senator Chaney on behalf of the Prime Minister in Adelaide on 5 December. In that speech Senator Chaney set out not only to argue-I believe it is an important argument-for Liberal philosophy but also to put a case for the new conservatism. Towards the end of the speech there are a number of propositions which are described as being central to the new conservatism that the Prime Minister apparently espouses. I want to refer to each of the four principles which are set out. The first one reads:
The Government is concerned .to maximise the degree to which )Jeople have control over their own lives and their own resources. . . .
The second one reads:
To this end the Government is concerned to limit the role and reduce the power of the State, and as part of that to restrain taxes and to contain public expenditure. . . .
The third one reads!
The Government is committed to supporting and strengthening the private enterprise system in Australia.
The final one reads:
. . . in an age of turbulence and innovation, the Government is concerned that the process of change shall be a deliberate and considered one and tha t those things which . . . Australians value highly are not lost or damaged in the process.
It appears to me that there is nothing particularly new about the so-called new conservatism to which the Governor-General's Speech refers and which the Prime Minister so strongly espouses. No doubt the reason for expressing these sentiments was a certain feeling in the Australian electorate that there was very little congruence between these values, particularly the values about democratising society and giving people greater control over their lives, and the somewhat authoritarian, arrogant conduct which is so often associated with this Prime Minister. Nevertheless, I believe that the propositions which have been put forward are worthy of examination and ought to be examined by this Parliament. Too little do we take ideology seriously within the context of this Parliament. Too often do we admit that the views being expressed have an ideological basis and a reference to traditions and philosophies which go back in history.
I refer particularly to the first proposition put forward in that summary; that is, that the Government is concerned to maximise the control of people over their own lives. It is suggested that the institutions which might li.mit that are government, bureaucracy, the unions and corporate power. What is common to each of these institutions is that they are all ordered in a thoroughly hierarchical way. One might ask a question about the institution of government and address the

Governor-General's Speech

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 187

question to the Prime Minister. Has the ,Brime Minister sought to make government mor~ responsible, for example, to his own party? To what extent has he sought to increase the power of the members of the back bench to make his Government more reponsive to the views of people within his party? To what extent has he or his Government sought to make its activities more responsive to the interests of the Parliament? To what extent has the Government sought to encourage debate to see that the policies and programs developed are tested in this chamber by vigorous debate? To what extent has his Government sought to produce its policies an~ programs, regarding the Parliament itself as irrelevant?
1 believe that if we answered those questions we would have to answer that this Government has not been particularly sensitive either to the party process or to the needs of the Parliament to be involved in debate about its policies. We cannot forget that this Prime Minister was associated, in his own intervention and in his own drive for power, in debasing this institution by the means he used. One might ask: Where are the proposals of this Government for parliamentary reform, proposals that might have opened up the Parliament itself and the policies it is debating to wider scrutiny and wider analysis? What reforms have been introduced for the committee system of the Parliament? What opportunities have been provided for people to be involved in investigating the issues which face this nation? I would not suggest that this Government has been strong on reform of this institution, although Mr Speaker has made a number of suggestions.

There have been no initiatives with respect to the trade union movement either. The fourth institution referred to by the Prime Minister as representing a problem in this respect is the corporations. Indeed one would have to argue, if one looks at those speeches in their context, that the corporations are not seen as a significant part of that problem. The problem is seen essentially to be not in the corporations, which are to be delivered from bureaucracy, but in the government or the state. 1 believe it is here that we get some clue as to the essence of conservative philosophy. The state must be restrained because it operates as a countyrvailing power to that of the corporations. It is these corporations which, in Liberal philosophy, must be untrammelled. They are no longer, apparently, the robber baron enterprises that they may have been in the nineteenth century, but they are seen in Liberal philosophy as civilised institutions working to improve the material conditions of the people. Their problem is that they have been too fettered by government, which competes for resources and would seek to limit the range of their freedom.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Youth Unemployment-Petroleum Industry-ABC Showband-Small Business:
Government Requests for Statistical Information-Proposed Office Development: West Pennant Hills-Industrial Disruption:
Coal Industry
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.30)-1

One could ask similar questions in relation to focus my attention on the subject of unemploy-

the bureaucracy. If the Prime Minister is conment, in particular on youth unemployment as it

cerned about the removal of hierarchical arrangerelates to a particular resources development

ments and the involvement of people in the conarea. For years now, we have been told that there

trol of their lives, to what extent has he sought to will be a resources development boom. I wish to

introduce reform within the bureaucracy which address my remarks to what has been the totally

serves the Government? Again I think one would ineffective approach by the Fraser Government

have to answer the question by saying that there to public investment in the future of this great

have been no significant proposals for reform of country. We have had five years of trying to jus-

the bureaucracy which would make that bureauctify the need to cut back on public expenditure.

racy more sensitive or responsive to the ParliaWe have not heard from this Government of the

ment, make it more sensitive or open to public need for public investment. Because of its philo-

opinion or introduce elements of industrial . sophical and ideological approach to free

democracy so that workers had greater control enterprise, this Government has created a men-

over their lives. I believe that if one examines the tality in the community which, by its very nature,

record of both the Government and the Prime will seriously retard the development of this

Minister with respect to those institutions one will country. The community has been encouraged to

find that there has been no movement towards believe that the unemployed are the cause of their

achieving less hierarchical forms of social own situation. The education system has been

organisation.

blamed for the number of unemployed.

188 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Adjournment

I turn now to deal with some of the realities that honourable members opposite would like to ignore to suit their ideological position. As an example of what is being contemplated, let us have a look at the situation in southern Victoria. Let us have a look at an area in my electorate of McMillan which takes in some of the brown coal areas of the Latrobe Valley in central Gippsland. The Gippsland region is going through a period of accelerated industrial development. It is now one of the three important growth areas in Australia. Its importance equals that of Gladstone in Queensland and the Hunter Valley in New South Wales. More than $8 billion worth of projects have been announced or foreshadowed. There are more in the pipeline. These include the State Electricity Commission's Loy Yang project. This is one of the biggest projects, if not the biggest project, in the Southern Hemisphere. There are to be large extensions to Esso's installations in Bass Strait. Proposals have been announced to extend the plant of the Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd at Maryvale, right in the heart of the Latrobe Valley. There are proposals to build pilot plants to produce solvent refined coal and brown coal to oil in the near future. At this time, the Public Works Committee of the Victorian Parliament is being asked to report by the end of June as to whether the next stage in the Victorian State Electricity Commission's proposals should go ahead at Driffield. This proposal is to build another power station in my electorate. It will be bigger than the Loy Yang project. Heavy demands, therefore, will be placed on the training facilities and on colleges of advanced education to provide the skilled labour which will be required to build these projects.
The Latrobe Valley has developed into an area of national significance in which a range of educational resources must be part of the fundamental infrastructure. This is the paradox: In the five years of the Fraser Government, we have been bombarded with the ideology of free enterprise. We have been told that the Government must make room for private investment. I should like to highlight the result for our young people of this approach. Government spokesmen, with all their ideological rhetoric, have convinced many parents that their sons and daughters should grab the first job which becomes available. This has created a situation in which many highly intelligent young people are opting to take jobs which do not require higher education qualifications. The State Electricity Commission in Victoria now has a group of apprentices with the highest qualifications on record. Students with Form 6 standard education are taking apprenticeships in

prefe,rence to continuing to complete their education. This pressure from the top down is creating further unemployment than would be the case if more of our young people could confidently go on with their education. What a tragedy this is for this country. In five years from now, the State Electricity Commission will have a work force which will be totally dissatisfied with its employment. Young people with ability should be encouraged to continue with their education. They should not be placed in the position of taking the first job which comes along. This Government has cut back the allowances for those eligible under the TertiaryEducation Allowance Scheme. It has cut back expenditure on education to the stage where we are facing a resources development but we will have no skiUed tradesmen to carry out the necessary work. At the same time we have a group of unemployed people who have little chance to get any jobs available. Since the election in 1980, the Government has announced that there will be cuts in the unemployment benefit rate for 16 and 17 year olds. This shows that the Government has not learned its lesson. It intends to attack the problem from the wrong position. I urge this Government to realise that this country will not develop unless we train those people who are required.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.35)-Last year, the Government introduced legislation in an endeavour to protect a section of the petroleum industry, namely, the service station proprietors of Australia. At that time there was a fair amount of cynicism in relation to that legislation. Some of that cynicism still remains. Some people believed quite firmly that the Government did the right thing but others believed that there was no way to stop the manipUlation and to stop some of the movement within the oil industry. There have been many reports within the oil industry and there have been many moves to overcome some of the problems of which we have all been aware.
Coming to Canberra from Sydney today by aeroplane, after talking to a group of service station proprietors who are still in a difficult situation in relation to their survival in the industry, I read the Sydney Morning Herald. It is not my intention to criticise or run down anybody. As honourable members are aware I never do that. I read a report in the finance section of the Sydney Morning Herald which was headed: 'Sir Walter's last shot at price "manipulation" '. I will read a few paragraphs from this article. It stated:

Adjournment

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 189

Sir Walter Leonard fired yesterday a parting shoUll ,What, '

he termed the 'political manipulation' of Australia's' petrol'

pricing mechanism.

' ;",

Sir Walter, who stepp~ down as chairman of Amp,ol Petroleum after \0 years in the position, said State Governments were not prepared to fall in line with the Prices Justification Tribunal.

He said petrol pricing had been a political football throughout his 43 years in the oil industry.

Sir Walter added: 'The difficulty today is that we don't know what sort of football we are playing.

'It used to be Australian rules, but it seems to be a combination of that and some foreign game introduced to this country.

') suppose the tentacles of governm~nt are felt in many industries, but I would suggest nothing to the extent that happens in the oil industry.

'Over the last few years the oil industry has been subjected to the most detailed investigation by the Federal pricing authority and other Government agencies on no less than 16 occasions'.

I say to Sir Walter that the oil industry deserved being subjected to those investigations.

I am afraid that some of the things that occurred in the last 20 years as a result of the manipulation by the oil companies are things of which this country should be ashamed. I refer to the thousands of decent respectable Australians who have endeavoured to earn a living within that oil 'industry but who have been maniplliated by the oil companies. The trouble is that petroleum giants and the executives who work within this industry seem to forget one fundamental point. Their industry and their businesses were built up
by the efforts of people working within that industry. Those people have toiled for years to make the oil companies as great as they are today. Unfortunately, because of this manipulation these people have not been treated as part and parcel of the oil industry. Many of these people have lost their livelihoods. Many of them have lost everything that they put into their business enterprises. This Government and previous governments allowed that to happen. How could a person compete when he could not buy the, petrol for the price for which other people were selling it? It is a simple fundamental. That is the sort of thing that went on for many years. For over 10 years the people of Victoria, because of the petrol discounting that took place in that State,were able to buy their petrol more cheaply than retailers in the other States were selling it for. That is the sort of thing that was allowed to go on. In fact, the people in the rest of Australia were subsidising the people of Victoria. We all stood by and allowed that to happen. I could quote many instances of this sort of thing but I do not have the time to do so.

I would just like to say to Sir Walter that unfortunately he has stepped down as Chairman of Ampol; he has had a critical shot at this Government and other governments; he has had a critical shot at the people employed in the industry but unfortunately he should have had a good look at himself and the other oil company magnates.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (1O.40)-Yesterday we learned with dismay that the Australian Broadcasting Commisson Showband which is stationed in Melbourne and which is one of Australia's most successful orchestras was slashed in half by the ABC. Sacked members were told that lack of funds was the reason for their dismissal. The ABC Showband has a long list of successful engagements to its name and indeed is a credit to Australia. It is in fact the only one of its type in the Commonwealth. However, the Fraser Government now, through its total choking of funds, has finally carved into the creative heart of this country.
Why only half the band has been sacked is a mystery. Is this the end of the whole orchestra? All the arrangements have been made for the full band. So what happens now? There is no money for any new arrangements. May I remind honourable members that sevenll years ago the Sydney Showband disappeared in much the same '!'lay. Does the Fraser Government, through the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), intend to strangle the ABC totally? This Government should be assisting and encouraging the creative people of this country-not only musicians but also actors, artists, singers, dancers, directors and producers, just to name a few, to fulfil their talent and develop an artistic culture that is sadly lacking in Australia today. Instead, just about all the creative bones of this country have been shattered.
This is just another example of this Government's treatment of its own employees. By imposing Dracula-like legislation on its own public servants and setting staff ceilings in many government departments such as the Commonwealth Employment Service, this Government is hindering people in their effort to achieve full time employment. The youth of this country especially is suffering.
The entertainment industry cannot hope to succeed if the government of the day does not assist and financially encourage it through government funding. Tax concessions announced by the Fraser Government at the last elections do not solve the many problems existing in the entertainment industry today. Too often private individuals are left to cream off profits while the creative

190 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Adjournment

heart of Australia is slowly driven into the ground. Why do so many young Australians go overseas in an attempt to extend their talents? This country has never looked after its creative people, and by handingout a few dollars through taxation benefits this Government is perpetuating that situation-a situation that has existed under conservative coalition governments for 28 of the last 31 years.
The ABC Showband is one of Australia's foremost orchestras. It has a wonderful reputation. It has given many thousands of people hours of enjoyment and now it has been slashed in half. As I said before, does this mean the end of this great orchestra? I sincerely ask the Government to look at this situation carefully and, if lack of funds is the real reason, to supply those funds to the ABC to keep this wonderful orchestra operating so that many more hours of enjoyment can be had by the many thousands of Australians who appreciate its music. We cannot allow orchestras such as the ABC Showband to be slowly eaten away never to appear again on the Australian scene. That is exactly what will happen if this Government does not take steps to rectify the situation. I urge the Minister for Communications to do something about this situation and to look immediately at the position in which the ABC Showband finds itself.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (l0,45)-A constant complaint being made by the Australian business community, especially the small business sector, centres on what seems to be the increasing burden of responding to government requests for statistical and other business information. This paper burden has been documented in part by one of its major generators, the Australian Bureau of Statistics. A survey of small business enterprises conducted by the ABS indicated that the perceived cost to small business of completing government forms during 1978 was $215.3m, representing an average cost of $604 for each small enterprise. Of the total cost, 80.5 per cent was attributable to paperwork originating from the Commonwealth Government, 18.3 per cent to paperwork originating from State governments, and 1.2 per cent to paperwork originating from local government authorities.
I am pleased to say that the Federal Government for its part is at least aware of the problem. In March last year the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) announced that all Commonwealth departments and authorities would be reviewing the paperwork requirements they impose on the business community with a view to achieving a reduction of the paper burden. This announcement flowed directly from the ABS

survey and a related interdepartmental committee study of the matter. This on-going review is welcome and it is to be hoped that further reductions in government paperwork result. I say 'further' because in fairness the ABS, as stated in its 1979-80 annual report, is also very conscious of the need to minimise demands upon the business community for data. However, business complaints about the paper burden continue unabated.
The small businessman especially feels himself inundated with goverment questionnaires asking for information so obscure that he as a proprietor does not possess it, nor in his opinion ever needs to possess it for the efficient and profitable running of his business. To obtain from what the businessman's point of view is needless and irrelevant information, involves considerable time and unproductive effort and incurs costs most small, businesses can ill afford. What is more, business is subject to a penalty if it fails to comply with an official request for information.
I certainly recognise the need for any government to collect information in order to provide a consolidated data bank from which to assess current policies and for use as a basis for formulating new initiatives. However, to attempt to strike a balance between meeting increased demands for official statistics and minimising the reporting burden on business of ABS collections, it is my suggestion that businesses should be paid for completing ABS and similar. questionnaires. I think it is quite reasonable for a government to recompense enterprises for the time and effort spent in supplying requested information. Such recompense, set at realistic and appropriate levels, would offset business costs incurred completing questionnaires. But more importantly, the requirement to pay for business information will properly discipline the ABS and other collecting authorities to request only that information that is considered vital to national data collection. I will be placing this suggestion before the Minister for Industry and Commerce, the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) and the Treasurer (Mr Howard). I sincerely trust the Government will give this matter the consideration it deserves.
Mr UREN (Reid) (l0.50)-An article on the front page of today's Australian Financial Review reports that IBM Australia Ltd plans to locate its Australian-New Zealand head office in the Sydney suburb of West Pennant Hills. IBM is reported to have acquired 65 acres in that suburb at an estimated cost of around $5m. IBM's plans to consolidate its administration and management under one roof are said to involve an expenditure

Adjournment

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 191

of around $20m for a development which,' \ViIl cover 4,500 square feet. Clearly that is a largy.investment in urban land. It is a proposal for office development which would have an enormous impact on Pennant Hills or the Hills district ofSydney and eventually on a large part of the Sydney metropolitan area. This development would affect location, employment, population densities, housing prices, traffic flows, business location decisions and the provision of infrastructure.
Because of the large scale impact of such an investment decision it needs to be planned within an urban policy framework consistent with the Sydney outline plan of 1968 which, of course, was again revised in 1980. It is an arrogant act on the part of IBM-one of the world's largest transnational corporations-to assume the right to determine the shape of urban development in the Sydney metropolitan area and to make such a huge investment decision without the approval of the appropriate public authorities. What astounds me is that IBM has the arrogance to think that it can get a change in land zoning in such an area where there will be a great deal of sensitivity, particularly involving those people living in that area. It is true that the central business district of Sydney and North Sydney is over centralised to a point of inefficiency. This overcentralisation has created gross inequalities in relation to access to jobs and cultural amenities for those people in the western suburbs of Sydney. A move of private sector and public sector office space to the suburbs is a desirable thing and should be encouraged but it should not be undertaken without prior public planning or without an urban impact assessment. It certainly should not be undertaken in West Pennant Hills.
We should be striving to develop submetropolitan nodes within the metropolitan area of Sydney such as at Parramatta, Campbelltown and Penrith. We should be striving to organise the urban public transport services which will connect those nodes. In my view a sensible place to establish that area would be at Penrith, at the foot of the Blue Mountains. The cost of land and dwellings in the Blue Mountains is the lowest in metropolitan Sydney. It is a pleasant place in which to live and certainly it would fit in with the outline plan of Sydney. For far too long market forces have been determining where these areas of development should be located. In Sydney this plan to determine where these areas should be developed has been in operation since 1968. We have not only been over-developing the central business district of Sydney but also the cultural facilities and job opportunities. If this company worked in with the State Government, local

government and the Australian Government this would be a progressive move.
I talked to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) who is sitting at the table. He represents the Government. This is a foreign corporation. It so happens that this Parliament has control over the investments of foreign corporations. It can say to such a foreign corporation: 'Yes, we want your investment in real estate development but at places where it will be in the interests of the Australian community, and in the interests of a rational development of a metropolitan area'. Certainly, a place like Penrith would be a rational development. But to choose a place like Pennant Hills is a stupid and arrogant decision. I am surprised to see such arrogance appear on the front page of the Australian Financial Review. If such an investment is allowed at this stage it would be against the best interests of planning. I believe there should be strong opposition to this development not only in West Pennant Hills but also all over metropolitan Sydney.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (lO.55)-Tonight I want to draw the attention of the House to a new form of industrial disruption which is being aided by the Government of New South Wales and which is massively affecting the coal industry, particularly in my electorate, along with other industries involved in the bulk export of commodities. I refer in particular to the way in which the Government of New South Wales allows levels of industrial disruption to persist when those schemes of disruption do not in effect involve any substantial reduction in the pay of the unionists involved but which bring about enormous disruption to the private sector industries using those facilities. I draw attention particularly to the coal loader at Port Kembla and-if one can call it this-the rail shunters' strike in New South Wales.
In the case of the rail shunters' strike, which has been going on for a bit more than three weeks, there is a limitation on the number of wagons which can be attached to a train with the result that the large 20-wagon loads of coal required to make the transport of coal economic are no longer available to coal exporters. The result is that approximately 30 ships "are standing off Newcastle costing between $10,000 and $15,000 a day in demurrage. As a result of this strike and the coal loader strike a cost of about $400,000 a day is being met either by the coal industry, other bulk export industries, or the customers. Ultimately that cost will come back to the Australian industries and will be reflected in the capacity of those Australian industries to pay bonuses to the miners

192 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Adjournment

or taxes to the Australian community. It seems to me that there is a total lack of recognition by the unions involved, and'certainly by the New South Wales Government, of the consequences of this kind of ratbaggery.
An amount of $400,000 a day is not just lost exports or lost profits that might have been made on exports but it is a direct cost that cannot be recouped in any w'ay whatsoever. Yet the Government of New South Wales-particularly while the by-elections were being held in the Hunter Valley-was not prepared and never has been prepared to stand up to those of its employees who are refusing to work, particularly when the impact of that refusal is not felt by the State Government but by the private sector using those facilities. This is an appalling situation. Equally appalling is the situation in the coal loader at Port Kembla where there has been nonstop disruption for three months. Of course, that disruption does not take place on Saturdays and Sundays when special incomes can be earned for work done on those days. This is what happens: There are wildcat, eight-hour strikes. One shift goes off. The situation is timed so that the tide will not enable the next shift to complete the loading of the bulk carrier. In effect one can have a situation where one eight-hour strike can produce another eight hours of non-production at the expense of the coal exporter, the miner and, in particular, at the expense of the coal truckie. Members of the Transport Workers Union who live in my electorate and whose incomes depend on the capacity to transport coal to the coal loader have complained to me that over the last three months they have suffered a 62 per cent reduction in income. Their fellow unionists at the coal loader do not care a damn for them, for Australia or for the future of the coal industry in general. Instead of standing these people down, instead of confronting them or preventing this kind of ratbaggery continuing, it is appalling that the New South Wales Government has adopted a continually pusillanimous approach. We have the curious situation that once a judge was called in and he said to these coal loader people: 'I will not hear your case until you do some work--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs) (10.59)-1 wish to reply briefly to the comments made by the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles). I am in complete sympathy with his sentiments concerning the Australian Broadcasting Commission Showband. I possess a number of its tapes and

records which I am sure will be collectors items if indeed that Showband is to be disbanded or reduced in number. I am sure that my colleague, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), would respond to the honourable member by saying that it is not a decision for this Government. Over a number of years this government has deliberately kept the ABC as a separate statutory corporation. It makes its own decisions. It can be verified that the Government has given substantial funds to the ABC. If the ABC has chosen to disband the Showband or reduce its numbers, I as a taxpayer and a consumer of its music, would be disappointed. But it would not be a decision of this Government and 1 am sure that my colleague, the Minister for Communications, would wish me to place that fact on record.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11 p.m. NOTICES
The following notices were given: Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes. ' Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes. Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears. Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes. Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973. Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Currency Act 1965. Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters. Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Flags Act 1953. Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes. Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accorance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report, namely, provision of Army housing at Townsville, Queensland.

Papers

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 193

PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 25 February 1981, pursuant to statute:
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos. 18, 19,20,21,22.
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendment of the schedule to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia, dated 17 February 1981.
Student Assistance Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 23.

Superannuation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 198I,Nos.15,17.
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications Commission-By-Iaws-
Telecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendment No.6. Telecommunications (Community Calls)-Amendment No.5. Telecommunications (Staff)-Amendments Nos. 32,33. Trade Commissioners Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 16.

194 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Religious and Other Cults
. Mr Viner-On 27 November 1980 Mr Goodluck asked me, as Minister representing the Attorney-General, the following question without notice:
My question. is directed to the Minister representing the Attorney-General. By way of explanation, let me say that during the past three weeks I have been approached by concerned parents about the development oheligious and other cults in this country. Some of the information conveyed to me is most disturbing and, if I may say so, nauseating. Will the Minister request the Attorney-General to call for an up-to-date report on these religious and other cults in this country?
The Attorney-General has now supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The activities of some religious cults give rise to concern within the community from time to time and I am asked to investigate them. The view that I have taken is that as freedom of religion and belief is involved the proper way for these matters to be dealt with is by persuasion, discussion and exposure of excesses. Because of these considerations I have not regarded it as appropriate for the Commonwealth to carry out a general investigation of their activities.
The cults and their members must, however, comply with the law and if there are grounds for believing that the cults or their members have breached the law, this is a matter for police investigation. I should also mention that the power of the Commonwealth to take action is, in any case, limited and the activities of these organisations are primarily matters for State rather than Commonwealth law.
The subject of religious cults was discussed by the Standing Committee of Commonwealth and State Attorneys-General in October 1979. The Attorneys-General agreed that undesirable activities of cults should be dealt with under ordinary laws governing the community generally, that nothing should be done that might infringe basic religious freedom, but that any particular harmful or fraudulent practices should be identified and dealt with bylaw.
TIFA Machine
(Question No. 16)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Was the TIFA machine used at Maralinga, SA during atomic teSts there; if so, (a) what were its operational principles and (b) who was the manufacturer?

(2) Was the machine used for spraying insecticides or herbicides or both?

(3) What (a) chemicals were sprayed from the machine, (b) concentrations were used and (c) was the frequency of spraying.

Mr Killen-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(1) It has not been possible to establish whether a TIFA machine (Todd Insecticidal Fog Applicator) was in fact used at Maralinga during the period of the atomic tests there. The TIFA machine, which is normally mounted on or towed behind a vehicle, is designed specifically for the spraying of insecticides. Its operational principle is that the insecticide, dissolved or suspended in a carrier fluid, is first atomised mechanically and then introduced into a blast of hot air and further fractionised. On contact with the atmosphere this material becomes a fog which is dispersed over a wide area.

(2) While a TIFA machine could have been used at

Maralinga for the spraying of insecticides, it is considered un-

likely that it would-have been used for herbicides, as the

nature of the vegetation there is not likely to have required the

use of herbicides.

.

(3) In the absence of factual information on whether a TIFA machine was used at Maralinga, I am unable to answer the remaining parts of the honourable member's question.

Vietnam: Herbicides and Pesticides
(Question No. 17)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice~ on 26 November 1980:
(I) What currently serving (a) RAAF (b) Army and (c) Naval Medical Officers, were serving in Vietnam at any time during the program of spraying herbicides and pesticides during hostilities there indicating (i) name, (ii) rank (then and now) (iii) present locations.
(2) Have any of these Service Medical Officers conducted medical examinations of currently serving personnel who were serving in Vietnam in any areas sprayed during hostilities: if so, (a). how many medical examinations have been conducted and (b) what were the results.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as folklws:
(1) The following table sets out the information requested in relation to currently-serving medical officers of the Defence Force who served in Vietnam:

Name Navy-
Gray, R. J. J. Army-
Watson, W. J.
James, W.B.

Rank During Vietnam service
Commander LtColonel Major

Now Captain Major General Brigadier

Present location
Navy Health Services Canberra Director-General, Army Health Services,
Canberra Director of Medical Services, Army

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 195

Name Rodgers, W. O. Maynard, G. J. Meyer,R.H. Purser, B. N. Taske,J. E. Dunn, LT. Donaldson, E. Jeffrey, R. J. Luscombe, A. p, Lewis,E.D. Rossi,D.G. Daniels, B. R. C.
Air ForcePlowright;R. W.
Nelson, G. C.
MilIer,M.D.

Rank During Vietnam service LtColonel Captain LtColonel Major (Reserve) Captain LtColonel Major (Reserve) Captain Captain Captain' Captain Major (Reserve)

Now Colonel Colonel Colonel Colonel, Colonel Colonel LtColonel LtColonel LtColonel LtCo.\onel LtColonel Major

Wing Commander

Air Commodore

A/Wing Com-

mander

A/Group Captain

Squadron Leader

A/Group Captain

Present location
Colonel (Professional Services), Army Office
Colonel (Environmental Health), Army Office
Director of Medical Services, 2nd Military Dsitrict
Director of Medical Services, 1st Military District
Director of Medical Services, Field Force Command
Director of Medical Services, 3rd Military District
Wright State University School of Medicine, Dayton, Ohio, USA
Exchange Officer, US Academy Health Services, San Antonio, Texas; USA
Commanding Officer II Field Ambulance, Brisbane
On leave without pay for 12 months Commanding Officer, 1 Military Hospital,
Yeronga, Brisbane Regimental Medical Officer, Royal Mili-
tary College, Duntroon
Deputy Director-General, Air Force Health Services, Air Force Office, Canberra
Principal Medical Officer, Headquarters Operational Command, Glenbrook, NSW
Principal Medical Officer, Headquarters Support Command, Melbourne

(2) Some 50,000 Australians served in Vietnam. An extremely complicated and costly task would be involved in collecting and presenting the specific information requested in the second part of the question, because it would involve individual examination of each Service member's medical records.

I would be happy to consider any request for specific infor-

mation about the use of herbicides' and insecticides by the

Australian forces in Vietnam.

'

United Kingdom Act of Settlement
(Question No. 36)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 November 1~80:
Was the Australian Government asked for advice on whether the United Kingdom Act of Settlement should be amefiddl; if so, (a) when was the advice sought, (b) who prepared the advice and (c) what advice was given.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. The Government has not been asked for advice on whether the Act of Settlement should be amended.
The Solicitor-Gener<ll did, however, provide an opinion on the Act of Settlement to the effect that the restrictions on holding public office in Section 3 of the Act did not have any application in Victoria or anywhere else in Australia; the Attorney-General conveyed this opinion to the Victofian Attorney-General.

Austral;an Broadcasting Commission: Mr Alan Carroll
(Question No. 37)
Mr B~rry Jones asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) On what occasions has Mr Alan Carroll <lppeared as economic an<llyst or commentator on, ABC programs during 1979 and the period I January 1980 to 25 November 1980.
(2) On What occasions has Mr Carroll (a) appeared alone, without any contrary economic view being stated and/or (b) appeared either in a debating context where another point of view was put or where another speaker appeared before or after Mr Carroll.
(3) Is Mr Carroll on a retainer with the ABC; if so, how much was paid out in 1979 and 1980to 25 November 1980.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) 41 in radio and 27 in television.
(2) (a) and (b) see below.
(3) No.

196 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Nationwide

28.2.79 Oil Prices-only talent-local 7.3.79 Analysis of Crawford Report-one of 4-
network 3.4.79 State of National Economy-followed by
Howard-network 18.6.79 New Oil Price Rises-only talent-local 2S.6.79 Tokyo Eco. Summit-only talent-local 27.6.79 Should Wage Index be Abandoned?-one of 4-
network 2S.7.79 New High CPI Figure-only talent-local 8.10.79 Comment on Crucial Interest Eco. Summit-
only talent-local 23.10.79 How Uranium Cartel Works-only talent-local 30;10.79 Ansett Takeover Moves-part talent-network 20.11.79 Murdoch Takeovers-several interviews-
network
12.2.80 Oil Price Rise-only talent-network 27.2.80 Tax Cuts and the Money Supply-only talent-
local 28.S.80 Will Australian Interest Rates Go Up?-only
talent-local 11.6.80 Government Policy on Oil Parity-only talent-
network 22.7.80 1st of Budget Series-analysis of politics vs econc
omics in budget-only talent-local 28.7.80 2nd of Budget Series-analysis of Government
moves on money supply-only talent-local
S.8.80 3rd of Budget Series-analysis of tax evasiononly talent-local
11.8.80 4th of Budget Series-analysis showing high rate of tax increases-only talent-local
18.8.80 Last of series of Srunning up to Budget-analysis ofleak-only talent-national
28.8.80 Increase in Home Loan Interest Ratesanalysis-only talent-national
12.9.80 The economy-only talent-local 18.9.80 Oil Prices-only talent-local
29.9.80 Oil and War-only talent-local 20.10.80 V.A.T.-one oftwo-network 23.10.80 Newspaper Enquiry-only talent-network 19.11.80 Interest Rates-only talent-network

PM

1979SFeb. 6 Feb.
9 Feb.
23 Feb.
28 Feb. 7 Mar. IS Mar.
26 Mar. 28 Mar. I May
10 May 2SMay
7 June 22 June

Alone With Mr John Flower, Australian Institute of Petroleum
With Mr John Llewellyn, Executive Director, Australian Finance Conference With Katherine West, Senior Lecturer in Politics, ANU Alone
Alone Alone, preceded by Opposition Leader, Bill Hayden's luncheon address to the National Press Club
Alone Alone
Interview between Mr Geoff Robertson, ABC News Financial Reporter, and Sir Roderick Carnegie, CRA Alone With Brian Powell, Executive Director, Victorian Chamber of Manufacturers, followed by actuality of the Prime Minister, and discussion with Katherine West. Alone Alone

2S June
27 June 10 July 6 Aug.
8 Aug. IS Aug. 1 Oct. 11 Oct. 2 Nov. SNov.
16 Nov. 1980-
13 Feb.
8 Apr. 14 Apr. 3July IS Oct. 27 Oct.

Alone, preceded by interview with ABC Tokyo correspondent, Walter Hamilton, about President Carter's visit to Japan for talks on energy. With Bruce Harnett, National Research Officer, ACSPA With Eric Risstrom of the Australian Taxpayers Association Alone, preceded by interviews with A/PM, Doug Anthony, on sale of Government's half share in Ranger, and Labor spokesman on Minerals and Energy, Mr Keating, on the same subject. Alone Alone Alone Alone Alone Alone, followed by interview with Laurie Carmichael, Assistant National Secretary, AMWSU on pay increases granted to metal unions, and with Mr Bert Evans, Deputy National Director, MTIA, followed by further comments from Allan Carroll. Alone
Alone, preceded by "PM" reporter speaking with Ken Donaldson of the sharebroking firm Potter and Partners and with Mr Dennis Tricks, ViceChairman, Australian Associated Stock Exchanges. Alone Alone With Dr Peter Swann, from the Faculty of Economics,ANU Alone Alone followed by interview he conducted with Hugh Morgan, Executive Director, Western Mining Corporation on WMC's announcement of an agreement with two US corporations on titanium processing.

Budget Night Specials

21 Aug. 1979
19 Aug. 1980

Part of a panel consisting of: Eric Risstrom, Taxpayers Association Dr Lionel Ward, Economist Dr Barry Hughes, Lecturer in Economics Flinders University
Part of a panel consisting of: Eric Risstrom Dr Lionel Ward Dr Barry Hughes

Money Talk Program

198026 June" Interview with Sir Noel Foley, about his new position as Chairman of CSR 17 July With Terry Campbell, a Melbourne broker, discussing investment 31 July With Alistair Maitland, Chief Economist, ANZ Bank 16 Oct. Alone 23 Oct. Speaks to Hugh Morgan, Executive Director, Western Mining.

Training of Pilots for Boeing 707 Aircraft

(Question No. 39)

Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(I) Do facilities for the training of pilots for Boeing 707 aircraft still exist in Australia; if not, have any arrangements been made for the training of future pilots for the 707 aircraft of the RAAF's No. 34 Squadron.

Answers to Questions

2S February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 197

(2) If arrangements for the training of these pilots have been made, (a) what are they, and (b) will any additional costs involved be a charge against the (i) Department of Defence or (ii) Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The RAAF B707 aircraft are not operated by No. 34 Squadron, but No. 37 Squadron which is based at Richmond.
In addition to the training conducted on the B707 aircraft itself, the training of pilots for Boeing 707 aircraft requires the use of a B707 flight simulator facility for both conversion and refresher training. No such facility now exists in Australia and arrangements have been made for use of the Cathay Pacific Airway's simulator in Hong Kong for the simulator sequences of training for RAAF B707 crews.
(2) The arrangement provides for an average conversion requirement of one crew (2 pilots, 1 flight engineer) per year, the continuation/refresher training of converted crews three times each per year, and conversion of an instructor crew on average every two years. All costs of RAAF training are a charge against Department of Defence.
Bushfires
(Question No. 45)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Has the Government been offered on a commercial or non-commercial basis, any aircraft specifically designed to fight fires by any Government, Company or individual in the last 5 years; if so, (a) what offers were made, (b) what type of aircraft were offered and (c) what costs were involved.
(2) When were the offers referred to in part (I) made and what were the official replies to them.
(3) Has the Government under consideration any offers for fire fighting equipment or any proposals to assist the States in fighting and preventing bushfires.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Several offers have been made to the Commonwealth to provide at the Government's expense fire fighting aircraft for demonstration or operational purposes. In most cases similar approaches have been made to the State Governments. Precise cost estimates were not provided but estimates of up to $2m were mentioned. Most of these offers have been in general terms and have involved such aircraft as the Canadair CL2l5, the Douglas DC6, the Neptune, small agricultural aircraft and U.s. or German equipment to convert Hercules transports to a fire-fighting role.
(3) As a response to representations by a number ofparliamentarians and also because of the Government's concern about the tremendous potential of bushfires for loss of life and property and stock damage, I announced on 22 September 1980 that the Government would commission a study by CSIRO to evaluate the effectiveness of using aircraft to fight bushfires. All State Premiers and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory have agreed to participation by their respective Governments.
The study does not merely involve, as some have suggested, a demonstration of water bombing. It requires CSIRO to design and implement a detailed scientific evaluation of the effectiveness of bombing fires of varying intensities with water and fire retarding chemicals. This will then need to be compared with an assessment of the effectiveness of conventional techniques under the same conditions. Finally, a cost-benefit analysis of bushfire suppression will be carried out. The study will obtain the quantitative measurements essential to an

objective evaluation of the effectiveness of aerial bombing as a fire suppression tool.
When the time comes for aerial trials to be conducted as part of the study, the CSIRO will call for tenders for aircraft to meet its requirements. The CSIRO is aware of the earlier offers.
Separately, the Commonwealth has agreed to provide a RAAF Hercules aircraft to the Victoriim Government to evaluate a Mobile Airborne Fire Fighting System to be supplied by the US Forest Service in the summer of 1981-82. This will be an extension of the current Victorian practice of fighting fires with small agricultural aircraft and the cost will be shared equally by the Commonwealth and Victorian Governments.
Apart from the above, the Commonwealth provides financial assistance to the States under the Natural Disaster Assistance Arrangements to assist those who suffer loss from bushfires. It also readily makes available Defence force personnel and equipment to fight bushfires when requested by the States. The value of Defence force assistance was amply demonstrated in recent fires in New South Wales and Victoria, where Defence force personnel, equipment and aircraft gave invaluable support to State bushfire fighters.
Vietnam: Toxins
(Question No. 52)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Were toxins used by Australian forces in Vietnam in order to have lethal effects on vegetation and insects, to deprive enemies of food and to render land unsuitable for-food production.
(2) Were the long-term sterilising effects on the land anticipated.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Herbicides were used by Australian forces in Vietnam primarily for the purpose of reducing vegetation around the perimeter of base areas. This vegetation offered cover to the enemy and thus posed a risk to Australian Servicemen. The RAAF also conducted a small number of crop destruction missions against Viet Cong garden patches in Phuoc Tuy province. Insecticides were used by the Australian Task Force to reduce the health hazards posed to Australian Servicemen by mosquitoes and other insects.
Information about the properties of herbicides used around the Australian Task Force base at Nui Dat is in papers I tabled in Parliament on 27 March 1980.
Movement of Naval Ships
(Question No. 66)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Will he bring up to date the information he gave in answer to question no. 6242 (Hansard, 11 September 1980, pages 1273-4) on the movement of naval ships in the Indian Ocean.
(2) Is he able to provide information on the movement of Russian naval ships in the North, West and South Pacific; if so, will he also provide this information.
(3) Is he also able to provide information on the movement of naval vessels in the following areas: (a) the Persian Gulf, (b) the Gulf of Oman, (c) the Gulf of Aden, (d) the Arabian Sea, (e) the Red Sea, (f) the Eastern Mediterranean and (g) the Black Sea; if so, will he provide this information.

198 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is shown in the tables attached hereto:
(1) Monthly class/day figures of Soviet naval and naval associated ships which operated in the Indian Ocean during the period of 1 August 1980 to 31 October 1980 are shown in the following table:
NAVAL ACTIVITY IN TIfE INDIAN OCEAN

Aug. Sept. ,Oct. 1980 1980 1980

Aircraft carrierKiev
CruisersKresta Kynda
DestroyersKashin Kotlin
FrigatesPetya Krivak Riga
SubmarinesFoxtrot Echo II Victor
MinesweepersT-58 Natya
Landing shipsIvan Rogov
Alligator Ropucha Polnocny AuxiliariesTugs Store ships Barracks ships Cargo ships Buoy tenders Oilers Repair ships Sub tenders Tankers Misc OthersOceanographic Hydrographic Space support Intelligence collectors

62 60 51
27 31 30 31
108 95 93 10 31
62 60 62 39 30 14 36 60 62 3.1 30 38 31 30 '21 31 30 11 31 38 62
11 30 28 31 12 21
106 120 113 31 30 31 20 30 31 62 30 31 128 136 169
26 63 31 64 40 31 30 31

There have been 14 transits by 14 ships thrQugh .the Suez Canal from 1 August to 31 October.
Indian Ocean ship day figures for the USSR, USA, UK and France are shown in the following table:

1980 (From 1 August-31 October)

USSR USA UK France

2,955 3,366
163 1,477

(2) The movement of Soviet naval ships in the North and West Pacific has for the most part involved transits to and from the Indian Ocean from Vladivostok. Several warships have been deployed to the South China Sea with some visits to

VietnameSe ports. Detailed information on Soviet naval activity'in these areas cannot be provided. There was no Soviet naval activity in the South Pacific during the period I August to 31 October 1980.
(3) Soviet, US, British and French naval vessels and those of regional navies are known to operate in the Persian Gulf, Gulf of Oman, Gulf of Aden, Arabian Sea, Red Sea, Eastern Mediterranean and Black Sea. However detailed information on naval activity in these areas cannot be provided.
Laboratory Animals
(Question No. 67)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the National Health and Medical Research Council and the CSIRO have now made it mandatory that ethics revieYf committees be established in all institutes using laboratory animals.
(2) Have similar committees been established wherever live animals are used for weapons research; if not, does the Government intend to rectify the position.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am aware that the Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals in Research includes a provision calling for the setting up of Animal Experimentation Ethics Review Committees in institutions undertaking research involving the use of animals.
(2) Only very limited use is made of animals in Defence research. Particular consideration is given to alternative approaches that appear capable of yielding the information required. Where animals are necessarily involved, the Code of Practice mentioned above is adhered to strictly together with relevant State legislation. The small scope of the activity and the very limited numbers of people involved would I1lake it impracticable to have in-house, Ethics Review Committees. Should work carried out by Defence ever calJ for reference to such a body, arrangements will be made to consult an appropriate committee of CSIRO.
Communications: Staff Levels
(Question No. 79)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Are staff (a) shortages, (b) ceilings or (c) restrictions (both imposed and voluntary) affecting in any major or minor way, the functions and services of (i) Australia Post, (ii) Telecom Australia, (iii) the Overseas Telecommunications Commission, (iv) the Broadcasting, Broadcasting Engineering and Radio Frequency Management Divisions of the Communications Department, and (v) the Promotions Appeal Boards of the Postal and Telecommunications Commissions: ifso, in what way.
(2) What have been the maximum allowable staff levels (a) requested from the Government and (b) actually obtained or operable, for each of these bodies or their predecessors as at 30 June in each of the last 7 years.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
'(i) Australia Post
(1) (a) Staffing levels within Australia Post are, I believe, adequate to enable the Commission to discharge its functions and to provide its services in a satisfactory manner. Short term

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 199

problems can arise, however, through unexpected staff absences at particular locations, and may present Australia Post with difficulties, in the short term, in meeting its service performance objectives.
(b) and (c) See answer to Question No. 4782 (House of Representatives Hansard, 22November 1979, page 3490).
(2) (a) Not applicable.
(b) Staffing levels, as appropriate to expected business volumes, are determined by the Australian Postal Commission and levels for each financial year since the Commission was established have been determined and revised as appropriate, in the light of changing circumstances. The total full-time operative staff for each completed financial year since the establishment of the Commission in 1975 is as follows:

Year ending

Actual staffing level as at 30 June

30June 1976
30June 1977 30June 1978 30 June 1979 30 June 1980

31,895 30,726 30,957 30,725 31,430

(ii) Telecom Australia
(1) (a) Telecom's manpower plans have necessarily to be balanced against the total resources available for telecommunications. Overall, a good standard of service is being given but naturally there are from time to time areas in which resources are less than the optimum.
(b) and (c) See answer to Question No. 4732 (House of Representatives Hansard, 22 November 1979, page 3490).
(2) (a) Not applicable.
(b) Staffing levels, as appropriate to expected business volumes are determined by the Australian Teiecommunications Commission and levels for each financial year since the Commission was established have been determined and revised as appropriate, in the light of changing circumstances. The total full-time operative staff for each completed financial year since the establishment of the Commission in 1975 is as follows:

Year ending

Actual staffing level as at 31 March

31 March 1980

2,203

(iv) Broadcasting, Broadcasting Engineering and Radio

Frequency Management

.

(I) The staffing levels achieved within the ceilirig limitations are generally adequate to meet the present functions and responsibilities of the Department in the broadcasting, broadcasting -engineering and radio frequency management areas.

Ceiling controls cause some difficulty in the day to. day management of most areas. However, a measure of increased efficiency has been achieved through joint Departmental /Public Service Board reviews into the Broadcasting area and the Radio Frequency Management Division, Some rationalis- , ation of staffing needs has been achieved also through the cur- . rent Canberra Transfer Program.

(2) The maximum allowable staff levels are established through the staff ceilings mechanism, which provides a total
Departmental figure. Requests from individual areas cannot be readily identified as they are the subject of continuing negotiation between the Department and the Public Service Board
for adjustment to the total figure. Staffing levels for elements within the Department are determined internally according to
assessments of relative priorities of the various functions of
the Department.

As a guide to the staff and ceiling movements over the period, the following lists the 30 June figure for full time staff
and staff ceilings since this Department and its predecessorPostal and Telecommunications-was created in July 1975.

Year ending
30 Juno;: 1976 30 June 1977 (I) 30 June 1978 30 June 1979 30 June 1980

Full-time staff
422 543 578 645 707

Ceiling
420 556 621 618 765 (2)

Year ending
30 June 1976 30 June 1977 30 June 1978 30 June 1979 30 June 1980

Actual staffing level as at 30 June
87,461 87,358 87,444 87,440 88,230

(iii) Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia)
(1) (a) No, (b) No, (c) No.
(2) (a) Not applicable, (b) The actual number ofStaff as at 31 March (end of OTC's financial year) in each of the last seven years is as follows:

Year ending
31 March 1974 31 March 1975 31 March 1976 31 March 1977 31 March 1978 31 March 1979

Actual staffing level as at 31 March
2,022 2,160 2,180 2,059 2,080 2,116

(1) Broadcasting Engineering function transferred from the Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
(2) With the expectation that the Broadcasting Information Office would transfer to the Department from the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal.
(v) Promotions Appeal Boards ofthe Postal and Telecommunications Commission
(1) (a) The provision of staff for the Promotions Appeal Boards of the Postal and Telecommunications Commissions is the responsibility ofthe Commissions. Telecom Australia provides support staff for the Boards under an arrangement with Australia Post. The level of staff provided by Telecom Australia is considered to be adequate to enable the Boards to carry out their functions.
(b) and (c) Not applicable.
(2) Not applicable.
Black Mountain Telecommunications Tower
(Question No. 81)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) What is the (a) initial proposed cost, (b) contracted cost, when contracts were first entered into and (c) final cost

200 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

of construction of the Black Mountain, ACT, telecommunications tower.

(2) What are the reasons for any differences in cost between the answer to parts I (a) to I (c).

(3) To what degree is each of these reasons responsible for any differences in cost.

(4) Does the final construction cost sum include all costs associated with the opening ceremonies of the tower; if so, what (a) was the total cost and (b) were the (i) contributing costs and (ii) factors responsible for these costs for all aspects of the ceremonies.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) $6.0m; (b) $6.336m; (c) The current cost is $15.698m. The project is yet to be financially completed as some work of a minor nature is still outstanding.

(2) and (3) A financial summary is as follows:

$m

Adjusted contract price ($6.336m) following

receipt of firm prices . . . . .

Normal application of the 'rise and fall'

clause of the contract . . . . . . .

Work outside the contract, for example, site

works restoration, resurfacing Black

Mountain Drive, security

Adjustment for extra labour costs and in-

creases in building costs for provisional

items in Bill of Quantities

Settlement of Contractors Claim for adjust-

ments to specified Bill of Quantities, other

prolongation claims and miscellaneous

extras

......

Additional work requested by Telecom dur-

ing the course of construction, for

example, additional amenities and mech-

anical and electrical services in various

areas of the Tower . . . . . . . .

Additional facilities such as entry turnstiles,

ticket booth, undercover access, public

facilities " . . . . . . .

Fitting out of restaurant concessionaire

6.014 4.325 1.286 1.295
1.515
0.533 0.341 0.389

15.698

(4) It is Telecom policy when opening a building of special significance to the community to hold an opening ceremony. Black Mountain Tower is a unique structure in Australian terms and community leaders, members of parliament and people who had made special contributions in the development of the Tower were invited to the official opening which was performed by the Prime Minister.
The cost of the opening ceremonies was $10,700.
During the four weeks following the opening 40,000 Canberra school children were invited to inspect the Tower, free of charge. A bus shuttle service was also provided at no cost to Canberra residents on weekends over the period 15 May 1980 through to 8 June 1980.

Naval Patrol Boat Base
(Question No. 95)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980.
(I) Is the Government investigating sites for a naval patrol boat base in the north-west of Western Australia.

(2) If so, has the funding for such a facility been included in future Defence expenditure announcements during the course ofthe last 12 months.
(3) If it has been included, what is the estimated cost.
(4) If it has not been included, when will the Minister make a statement amending the announced projected Defence expenditure.
(5) If it is the Government's intention to proceed with the facility, when will construction commence.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Government is investigating options for providing naval patrol boat facilities in the north-west of Western Australia.
(2) and (3) The amount of $.250m is included in the five year Defence program, 1980-1985 for the acquisition of land on which to construct these facilities.
(4) and (5) Investigation of options is stilI in progress. It is too early to predict when a statement on construction costs or timescale could be made.

Sir John Kerr

(Question No. 124)

Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

(1) Is he able to say whether the former Governor-General, Sir John Kerr, visited the Watsonia D.S.D., Victoria, station on 9 November 1975, and that, while there, he received a briefing in the Australian-American intelligence relationship.

(2) If so, when were the arrangements made for (a) this visit and (b) the briefing, and at whose instigation.

(3) Did this invitation emanate from (a) the Governor-

General and his staff or (b) any Govermnent department or

departmental personnel.

.

(4) If the invitation emanated from a Government department, which department or departments were responsible.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) On Saturday, 8 November 1975 the then GovernorGeneral, Sir John Kerr, visited Watsonia Barracks, Melbourne. The purpose of the visit was to review and address a parade marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Royal Australian Corps of Signals. The Governor-General afterwards attended a garden party and opened the Corps Museum at the Barracks. He did not receive a briefing on the AustralianAmerican intelligence relationship.

(2) Arrangements for the visit were made in the months February to June 1975.

(3) and (4) The invitation for the visit was extended to the Governor-General at the request of the Chief of the General Staff.

Pine Gap and Nurrungar Bases
(Question No. 125)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 6220 (Hal1sard, 9 September 1980, page \064) has his attention been dra wn to Chapter 1of the book, A Suitable Piece ofReal Estate, by Dr Desmond Ball, Senior Research Fellow of the Strategic Defence Studies Centre at the Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, in his description of facilities at Pine Gap, Northern Territory, in which Dr Ball

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 201

supports the general accuracy of the report in the San Antonio Light of their general function and purpose.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to Dr Ball's suggestion that it is possible that the United States of America informed the Soviet Union of the precise functions of Pine Gap and Nurrungar as part of the talks on Clause 7 in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) which states that neither party should interfere with the other's technical means of verification of the Agreement.
(3) Has his attention also been drawn to the statement made by Former Prime Minister Whitlam, that it was just folly to suggest that the Russians don't know everything about these bases, as reported in the Northern Territory News of 18 November 1970; iF so, is there any substance to this statement.
(4) Do the American public and the Russians have more knowledge and inFormation concerning these bases than his answer to Question No. 6220 indicates he is prepared to make available to the Australian Parliament; if so, is this appropriate.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Yes. The book contains assertions about the joint defence Facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar, and it is the Government's practice neither to confirm nor deny such assertions and speculation.
(3) I am aware of the statement made by Mr Whitlam in November 1970, before he had the benefit of full knowledge or led a government which had to accept responsibility for the handling of these matters. I would recall for the honourable member that Mr Whitlam and his (]overnment subsequently retained the same confidentiality about these facilities as previous governments did and subsequent governments have.
(4) I will not comment on what knowledge or information the USSR may have about the joint defence facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar. Concerning knowledge and information that the American public may have on the matter, the United States Government, like the Australian Government, treats information about the operations of these facilities as classified.
UKUSA Agreement
(Question No. 126)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(I) Is Australia a signatory to the UKUSA Agreement.
(2) Under this agreement, does the United States National Security Agency operate electronic intercept stations in Australia.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the allegation made by Dr Desmond Ball on page 47 of his book, A Suitable Piece of Real Estate, that the United States of America has used this situation to monitor the radio transmission of its UKUSA partners, as well as those of its other allies and neutral countries.
(4) Is there any substance to this allegation; if so, does the practice still occur.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's statement of 19 April 1977 (Hansard, page 990).
(3) Yes.
(4) See answer to (I) and (2) above.

Delay of Ansett Airlines of. Australia Flight AN39 on 15 August 1980
(Question No. 160)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Was Ansett DC9 flight AN39, scheduled to leave at 5 p.m. on Friday 15 August 1980 from Cairns to Townsville and Brisbane, Queensland delayed; if so, why.
(2) If the flight was delayed, (a) were passengers informed that the delays were caused by engine problems, (b) who made the decision to delay the flight, (c) how long was the flight delayed at Cairns, (d) during the delay, what action, if any, was taken to rectify any engine problems, (e) were inquiries made by Ansett to accommodate passengers in Cairns, (f) did Ansett ascertain that no accommodation was available in Cairns, (g) were inquiries made about the availability of accommodation in Townsville, (h) did Ansett ascertain that accommodation was available at Townsville, (j) how many passengers were on board the aircraft when it eventually flew from Cairns to Townsville, (k) who made the decision to allow the aircraft to leave for Townsville, and (I) how were the problems causing the delay rectified.
(3) When the aircraft arrived at Townsville, was it decided that it was unable to continue on to Brisbane; ifso, why.
(4) Is he satisfied that the aircraft complied with all saFety standards on the flight from Cairns to Townsville.
(5) Did this question appear on the Notice Paper of 9 September 1980 and remain unanswered at the termination of the 31st Parliament.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. Aircraft was delayed due to an oil leak in No. I engine.
(2) (a) Passengers were advised by Ansett's Airport Manager that the flight was delayed due to mechanical reasons.
(b) The flight was delayed as a result of the Captain's report.
(c) The flight departed Cairns 2 hours and 13 minutes behind schedule.
(d) The No. I engine was inspected and the rear turbine bearing face plate was found to be leaking. The leaking gasket was replaced and the engine was ground run to check the seal. It was found to be serviceable certified as such by the engineer, and accepted by the captain. The aircraFt was certified as satisfactory for further flight providing follow-up maint'enance was carried out at Brisbane.
(e), (f), (g) and (h) Ansett Airlines advise that there was no necessity to arrange overnight accommodation as a substitute aircraft was available.
(j) 69 passengers.
(k) The decision was made by the Captain of the aircraft in accordance with normal procedures following certification of serviceability by an appropriately qualified maintenance engineer at Cairns.
(I) Problem was diagnosed as due to a leaking gasket which was replaced at Cairns.
(3) Yes. The aircraft was unserviceable at Townsville due to high oil consumption during flight from Cairns. The engine was changed at Townsville.
(4) I am satisfied. on the advice I have received, that the airline took reasonable action, on the symptoms noted, to rectify the reported defect.

202 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(5) Yes. The question appeared on the Notice Paper of 9 September 1980, and due to the detailed nature of the inquiry requiring reference to records of other non-govern organisations, a reply was unable to be prepared prior to termination ofthe 31st Parliament on 18 September 1980.
Servicemen: Compensation for Injury
(Question No. 166)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that servicemen (a) injured as a consequence of service in a hostile environment (for example, in circumstances similar to the recent involvement of Papua New Guinea forces in Vanuatu) or (b) injured when part of a peace-keeping force, are not entitled to benefit from the provisions of the Repatriation Act.
(2) Is compensation in these cases limited to the provisions of the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The compensatory arrangements for servicemen in the situations suggested would depend on how long the serviceman had been a member of the regular Defence Force. Legislation enacted in December 1972 provided for the peacetime soldier after completing three years service to have access to repatriation benefits. The serviceman, therefore, who had completed three years service would be covered by both the Repatriation Act and the Commonwealth (CGE) Act. If he had not completed three years service he would be entitled to benefit from the provisions of the Commonwealth (CGE) Act only.
Defence Officer Appointments
(Question No. 167)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Were graduates who entered the Defence Force as a result of national service call-up treated differently to volunteer entrants with respect to officer appointment on completion of officer training.
(2) Were (a) volunteer graduates commissioned as 2nd lieutenants imd (b) national service inducted graduates commissioned as 1st lieutenants.
(3) Where national service officers continued in service as members of the regular forces, did the initial officer appointment differential result in continuing disadvantage and financialloss to volunteers.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) On completion oftraining at the Royal Military College, both degree and non-degree officers are appointed as lieutenants. The degree graduates and diplomates completing the Officer Cadet School training are also appointed as lieutenants; others are appointed 2nd lieutenants. Direct entry graduates and diplomates are, dependirig on their professional qualifications and experience, appointed as lieutenants or captains. This was also the position when National service was a component of the Army.
National Service entrants, both degree and non-degree, were appointed as 2nd lieutenants on completion of the six months training course at the Officer Training Unit, Scheyville.

(3) On appointment to the Australian Regular Army, former national service officers were required to serve specified periods of time before promotion to the rank of lieutenant. Former national service officers did not serve less time in rank before promotion to lieutenant than their volunteer counterparts. Following promotion to lieutenant, their conditions of service have been the same as for any other officer of the Australian Regular Army.
Defence: Rail Link between Darwin and Alice Springs
(Question No. 168)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) What level of priority for defence purposes is accorded the completion of the rail link between Darwin and Alice Springs, Northern Territory.
(2) Will moneys from the defence appropriation be utilised for any part of the cost of these works.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In my Department's submission to the joint Federal Department of Transport and Northern Territory Department of Transport and Works Study of the proposed Darwin-Alice Springs Rail Link, it was stated that the link 'would contribute substantially to the capacity and flexibility of transport facilities in northern Australia to support significant military deployments in that area if they were needed'.
(2) Defence therefore rates the construction of the railway highly in the development of national tran'sport infrastructure and believes that defence considerations should be seen as a significant benefit to such a link.
(3) In relation to a possible contribution from the defence appropriation to meet part of the cost of the link, it must be noted that the essential purpose of the Defence Vote is to provide for and equip the Defence Force.
In the widest national sense, a vast number of other national enterprises and investments contribute to defence capabilities. It would, however, be neither practicable nor appropriate to provide for all of these with a subvention from the Defence Vote.
(4) The Five Year financial guidance endorsed by the Government provides only for the essential development of the Defence Force and does not contain any scope for financial assistance to this project.
Naval Patrol Boats
(Question No. 191)
Mr Groom asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
Will he give consideration to naming one of the new patrol boats, or another vessel being built for the Royal Australian Navy, DEVONPORT, in recognition of the long maritime history of the beautiful Tasmanian town which will shortly become the first in the northwest of Tasmania to achieve city status.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The first fifteen Fremantle Class patrol boats were named after vessels of the Bathurst Class which were Ocean Minesweepers built in Australia during World War II. There were 56 ships in the class and they served in the Mediterranean, Indian and Pacific oceans on a wide range of duties. It is intended that the further 10 Fremantle Class patrol boats will

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 203

also bear names of the Bathurst Class which did not include Devonport.
However the name Devonport will be considered in any future naming of an appropriate HMA Ship.
Royal Military College, Duntroon
(Question No. 223)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(I) Were 3 cadets dismissed or asked to resign from the Royal Military College, Duntroon, ACT, following the shooting into a motor vehicle belonging to a civilian person who had previously been a student at the college.
(2) Ifso, when and where did the shQoting take place.
(3) Were military or police charges laid in relation to the alleged incident.
(4) Were any unlicensed weapons seized by college authorities following the alleged incident.
(5) If weapons were seized, (a) how many and (b) what type were seized, (c) what ammunition was seized and (d) is there any indication of where the weapons were obtained.
(6) If weapons were found, does (a) he or (b) the college authorities know for what purpose their use was intended.
(7) Is he able to say whether some cadets have conducted unofficial military exercises in the bush around Canberra on their own initiative.
(8) Was any literature of a fascist or political nature found in cadets' rooms by college authorities during their investigations.
,(9) Will he make a full p1,lblic disclosure of the events which have been alleged to have occurred at the Duntroon Military College.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) Three cadets were discharged administratively from the Royal Military College following unwarranted hazing of a former member of the Corps of Staff Cadets.
(2) Easter 1980 in a Canberra suburb.
(3) No.
(4) No.
(5) Seeanswer to question 4.
(6) Private weapons owned by cadets are used in their capacity as members oftheCol\ege rifle and pistol clubs and for off duty recreational activities. All weapons concerned were registered with the civil authorities. No weapons were seized but some irregularities concerning their storage were corrected.
(7) There is no knowledge of cadets conducting unofficial military exercises in the countryside around Canberra.
(8) No.
(9) The Commandant of the Royal Military College investigated the behaviour of the cadets concerned and concluded that they were unlikely to become efficient officers. This view was concurred in by the Chief of Personnel. There is no requirement to make any further public disclosure ofthe events.
Gas Operated Chairs
(Question No. 249)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:

(1) Where are the gas operated chairs mentioned in reference NP 1516 in Commonwealth of Australia Gazette G 47 of 25 November 1980 and being purchased at a cost of $22,984 to . be located. .
(2) How many gas operated chairs are being purchased and for what purposes are they being purchased.
(3) What facilities are the gas operated chairs designed to replace.
(4) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers for the contract.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The gas operated chairs are to be located in several Mail Centres in New South Wales and in the Canberra City Post Office. Similar chairs are in use in other postal centres throughout Australia.
(2) Disclosure of the number of chairs being purchased would reveal the unit price of the chairs. This information is regarded as 'Commercial-in-Confidence'.
The gas operated chaJrs provide readily adjustable seating facilities for staff engaged on letter sorting duties at vertical frames.
(3) The gas operated chairs are to replace obsolescent chairs which do not provide the required rapid and convenient means of height and back adjustment.
(4) This contract was let to Co-ordinated Design and Supply Pty Ltd-of North Sydney, NSW, without calling for tenders, because the chairs were needed urgently and technical evaluations undertaken during the assessment of previous tenders by Australia Post's NSW Administration had indicated that only that company could offer chairs which complied with Australia Post's specification.
Shipping: Motive Power
(Question N(l. 250)
MrMorris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Is he able to say what are the (a) advantages and (b) disadvantages of shipping powered by coal compared with that powered by oil.
(2) Has his Department conducted any studies into the comparable costs of operating ships powered by coal as opposed to ships powered by oil; if so, what were the results of those studies.
(3) Are facilities available or expected to become available for bunkering of coal powered ships on order for Australianbased shipping companies, if so, what.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The advantages of coal fired ships include:
Price. Coal is currently a more abundant resource than petroleum. Consequently, prices increases over the life of a ship may be expected to be less for coal than oil. At present, steaming coal is less than half the price per unit energy of fuel oil.
Pollution. There is reduced risk of pollution of the sea from spillage of ship's bunker fuel because coal, being heavier than water, sinks to the sea-bed. Coal fired ships are subject to the same emission controls as oil fired ships.
Trade. Use of coal fiied ships overseas could result in increased Australian steaming coal exports and Australian coal powered ships would reduce our dependence on imported oil.
The disadvantages of coal fired ships include:

204 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Capital Cost. Initial capital cost is about 8 per cent to 15 per cent greater than that of a diesel engined ship, depending on the vessel size and specifications.
Cargo Capacity. The bunker weight of coal may be two to three times the bunker weight of oil required for the same voyage, resulting in less cargo carrying capacity for the same ship size.
Bunkering Facilities. Until world-wide coal bunkering facilities are established, coal powered ships would be limited to trades where coal bunkering is available.
2. No, but the Department has been monitoring investigations into the economies of coal fired ships. As a simple indication of the current economies, annual bunker savings in the order of $1.5m are possible on a vessel of about 70,000 dwt.
3. Yes, facilities for bunkering of coal powered ships on order will be provided at Gladstone, so that the loading of coal bunkers can be carried out concurrently with the cargo handling.

Shipping: Motive Power
(Question No. 251)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Is he able to say what are the relative energy efficiencies of (a) coal powered, (b) oil powered, (c) nuclear powered and (d) wind assisted coal or oil powered ships used in international sea transport.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
To accurately determine the relative energy efficiencies of different marine fuels it is .necessary to take into account the mass of the fuel and the volume required for fuel storage. Thus for each type of fuel, a different size of ship may be required to carry the same cargo over a fixed route.
However, if energy efficiency is defined to be the energy required to transport a fixed weight of cargo over a specified distance, then coal-fired steam turbine ships appear to be slightly less energy efficiellt than oil-fired steam turbines and significantly less efficient than diesel-engined ships. Wind assistance, although still under development, has the potential to increase the energy efficiency of coal or oil fired ships. There are no nuclear powered commercial ships operating at present.

Export Finance and Insurance Corporation: Overseas Aid

(Question No. 258)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:

(I) Did he say in correspondence to me on 25 September 1980 that the Government will bridge the gap between the commercial rate of borrowing and the concessional rate of lending in the matter of the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation's borrowings from Australian trading banks.

(2) Is it a fact that (a) $445.8m of the 1980-81 Budget is allocated in the form of bilateral assistance to Third World countries of which $118.7m is allocated for project and technical assistance (b) $102.lm is provided for multilateral agencies and (c) development import grants to South Pacific countries have been introduced.

(3) If so, is the proposal outlined in part (1) a disguised form of aid.

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

.

(1) Yes.
(2) (a) Yes, although the $ll8.7m allocated for project and technical assistance includes a provision for disaster relief, (b) yes, (c) the Development Irnport Grants were introduced as a new feature of the Australian aid program in 1978-79. A new program of DIGs has now been introduced and will be made available to certain South Pacific and African and Indian Ocean countries.
(3) No. EFIC's finance facility is designed to assist Australian exporters of capital goods and services by providing finance on internationally competitive commercial terms and conditions. This facility is not designed to compete with the aid/commercial credit loans used by a number of our competitors. In this regard, export credit flows comprising EFIC type loans are not regarded as overseas development assistant by the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD.
At the same time, a new facility know as the Development Import Finance Facility (DIFF) has been introduced to Australia's aid program this year for use in ASEAN countries. The facility involves the use of aids funds in conjuction with EFIC finance to increase the concessional element in credit terms that Australian firms can offer when tendering for the supply of capital goods and services to those countries. An allocation of$1.6m has been made to DIFF 1980-81.
Oil Levy Revenue
(Question No. 259)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 3 December 1980: .
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that the United States of America allocates approximately 40 per cent of its oil tax revenue to developing public transport and to research and development into alternative fuels.
(2) Can he say what percentage of the annual $3000m oil levy is directed to (a) public transport and (b) research and development into alternative fuels by the Australian Government.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) I am aware of the provisions of the United States Crude Oil Windfall Profits Tax Act of 1980 as they relate to the disposition if windfall profits tax revenues. Under that legislation, the receipts for fiscal years 1980 to 1990 have been allocated to a number of specific purposes. One of these purposes is the energy and transportation spending program which has been allocated 15 per cent of net oil revenues. Of the remaining 85 per cent, 60 per cent has been allocated to individual and corporate income tax deductions, and the remaining 25 per cent to aid lower income households.
(2) (a) and (b) While the Government does have substantial commitments in the areas of public transport and research and development into alternative fuels, it believes that it is desirable that all expenditure commitments compete for funding on their merits and within the context of the overall availability of funds as determined by the needs of responsible economic management. The Government is not in favour of 'ear-marking' a portion of general revenue measures such as the crude oil levy toparticular expenditures. The Federal Government does, however, allocate funds for both public transport and research and development into alternative fuels under a number of separate expenditure programs. In relation to energy research and development, the National Energy Research Development and Demonstration Council (NERDDC) has committed a total amount of $59.7m for expenditure for this purpose, including several projects

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 205

examining the potential for alternative fuels. In relation to public transport, the 1980-81 Budget allocated $45m for expenditure on urban public transport under the States Grants (Urban Public Transport) Act 1978.
Sydney Air Traffic Control System
(Question No. 289)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he update the information provided in answer to Question No. 5556 in the 31st Parliament (Hansard, 26 March 1980, page 1300).
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following statistical information updates that provided in answer to the earlier question referred to by the honourable member. Revised information is given in respect of both 1979 and 1980, but both must still be considered as provisional in

that a number of incidents reported for these years have not yet been finally evaluated, classified and entered into the air safety incident statistical system maintained by my Department.
(l) Number of reported incidents involving a go-around from a landing approach:

1979 1980

(a) at Sydney Kingsford-Smith Airport-

(i) International airlines

3

4

(ii) Domestic airlines

4

2

(iii) Other aircraft . . . . .

3

3

(b) at other locations in the area of Sydney-

(i) International airlines

(i1) Domestic airlines

(iii) Other aircraft

6

3

(2) Details of each such incident involving air service operations which occurred between 7 March and 31 December 1980:

Date
10.5.80 10.5.1980
17.6.\980
9.7.1980 29.9.1980 15.10.1980

Location Sydney
Sydney
Sydney Sydney Sydney Sydney

Operator
Qantas
Garuda
Trans Australia Airlines Southern Cross Air Services Aeropelican Iritercity Trans Australia Airlines

Circumstances
Go-around initiated by ATC when expected separation may not have been achieved
Pilot considered inadequate separation with departing aircraft
Pilot initiated go-around when previous landing aircraft delayed in vacating runway
False landing gear warning False landing gear warning Pilot initiated go-around when expected separation
may not have been achieved

(3) Number of reported incidents involving an infringement of separation standards in each of the regions administered by my Department:

1979 1980

---------------------

Queensland

16

16

New South Wales

53

36

Victoria-Tasmania

.

28

23

South Australia-Northern Territory

18

14

Western Australia . . . . . .

10

9

Air Traffic Control Systems
(Question No_ 290)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he update the information provided in answer to question No. 5557 in the 31st Parliament (Hansard, 26 March 1980,page 1301).
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following statistical information updates that provided in answer to the earlier question referred to by the honourable member. Revised information is given in respect of both 1979 and 1980, but both must still be considered as provisional in that a number of incidents reported for these years have not

yet been finally evaluated, classified and entered into the air safety incident statistical system maintained by my Department.
(l) Number of reported incidents involving a go-around from a landing approach at major airports other than Sydney Kingsford-Smith:

1979 1980

Adelaide Alice Springs Avalon Brisbane Cairns Canberra Coolangatta Darwin Essendon Hobart Launceston Melbourne Perth Proserpine Rockhampton Townsville

2

4

I

1

1

8

7

I

5

2

2

1

3

4

3

2

I

I

I

3

5

9

5

I

(2) Details of each such incident involving air service operations which occurred between 7 March and 31 December 1980:

Date
12.3.80 2.4.80

Location
Brisbane Darwin

Operator
Bush Pilots Airways Northern Airlines

Circumstances
False landing gear warning. Pilot had difficulty exte!lding landing gear after a pre-
cautionary shut down of one engine.

206 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to QUestions

Date
6.4.80
24.4.80
27.4.80 6.5.80
6.5.80 7.5.80 18.5.80
11.6.80 28.6.80 7.8.80 15.8.80
20.8.80
29.9.80 30.9.80
4.10.80
31.10.80 4.11.80 9.12.80

Location
Brisbane
Perth
Adelaide Melbourne
Cairns Adelaide Brisbane
Brisbane Melbourne Brisbane Rockhampton
Adelaide
Perth Darwin
Darwin
Cairns Melbourne Hobart

Operator
Ansett Airlines of Australia
Skywest Airlines
Pagas Airlines Trans Australia Airlines
Air Niugini Opal Air Trans Australia Airlines
Trans Australia Airlines Ansett Airlines of Australia Ansett Airlines of Australia Trans Australia Airlines
Ansett Airlines of South Australia
Ansett Airlines of Australia Arnhem Air Charter
Air North
Ansett Airlines of Australia Ansett Airlines of Australia Ansett Airlines of Australia

Circumstances

Pilot considered inadequate separation with departing

aircraft.

Pilot considered inadequate separation with aircraft

landing on cross runway.

Landing gear malfunction.

Pilot considered inadequate separation with departing

aircraft.

"

Electrical system malfunction.

False landing gear warning.

Pilot considered inadequate separation with departing

aircraft.

False landing gear warning.

False landing gear warning.

False landing gear warning.

Pilot initiated go-around when landing clearance was

not given.

Landing gear malfunction.

False landing gear warning. Go-around initiated by ATC when expected separ-
ation may not have been achieved. Go-around initiated by ATC when expected separ-
ation may not have been achieved. False landing gear warning. False landing gear warning. Pilot initiated go-around because of windshear.

Third Level Airline and Commuter Aircraft
(Question No. 295)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon -notice, on 4 December 1980:
What additional information is he now able to provide in respect of Question No. 6213 in the 31 st Parliament (Hansard, 20 August 1980, page 575).
.\\'Ir Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The investigation into "the fatal Beechcra ft King Air accident at Sydney Airport, New South Wales on 21 February 1980, being conducted by the Air Safety Investigation Branch of my Department, is drawing to a close. I expect to receive the report of the investigation about mid 1981.
(2) My Department's review of commuter aircraft ~er tification, maintenance and operational standards has reached a stage where all industry submissions have been examined and the pertinent legislation introducing new standards is being developed. A document outlining the legislation changes and implementation dates is about to be distributed to interested operators and industry organisations.
Road Funds
(Question No. 303)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 12 December 1980:

(1) What funds have been provided to each (a) State and (b) Territory for road purposes by (i) category and (ii) in total for each year from 1971-72 to 1980-81.
(2) What is the comparison in real terms, using 1971~72 as a base year, of each item referred to in part (1).
Mr . Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Details of Commonwealth funds specifically made available for road purposes to the States during the period 1971-72 to 1980-81 and to the Northern Territory in 1979-80 and 1980-81 are provided in Tables 1 to 10 below.
The figures shown may vary from the amounts incorporated in the schedules to the respective Acts on account of authorised transfers between road categories and years.
Questions relating to the level of Commonwealth expenditure on roads hi the Australian Capital Territory during the period 1971-72 to 1980-81 should be directed to the Minister for the Capital Territory. Questions relating to expenditure in the Northern Territory during period 1971-72 to 1978-79 should be directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment.
(2) Estimates of Commonwealth road grants in real terms, using 1971-72 as a base year, for the years 1972-73 to 1980-81 are provided in Tables 11-19 below.

Table 1 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1971-72 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland "Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Principal grantsUrban arterial roads

39,060 30,300

19,270 11,500 12,030

4,370 116,530

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 207

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Rural arterial roads Rural roads other than arterial roads Planning and research

12,410 21,910
1,120

3,440 15,330
750

11,010 14,400
680

2,650 9,000
350

4,610 14,140
470

2,100 3,940
160

36,220 78,720
3,530

Total of principal grants

74,500 49,820

45,360 23,500 31,250 10,570 235,000

Supplementary grant

2,000

8,000

259 10,250

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

74,500

49,820

45,360 25,500 39,250 10,820 245,250

Other assistance (a)

8,214

375

1,625

10,214

Total

74,500 49,820

53,574 25,875 40,875 10,820 255,464

(a) Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance ofthe Eyre and Barkly Highways.

Table 2 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1972-73 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Principal grantsUrban arterial roads
Rural arterial roads
Rural roads other than arterial roads
Planning and research

46,520 14,780 23,010 1,280

36,170 4,110 16,100
860

23,040 13,170 15,120
780

13,940 3,210 9,450
400

14,830 5,690 14,850
540

5,290 139,790 2,550 43,510 4,130 82,660
180 4,040

Total of principal grants

85,590 57,240

52,110 27,000 35,910 12,150 270,000

Supplementary grant

1,000

8,000

9,000

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969
Other assistance (a)

85,590

57,240

52,110 5,514

28,000 1,000

43,910 1,925

12,150 279,000 8,439

Total

85,590 57,240

57,624 29,000 45,835 12,150 287,439

(a) Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways.

Table 3 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1973-74 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queenslillld Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Principal grantsUrban arterial roads
Rural arterial roads
Rural roads other than arterial roads

55,120 17,520 24,160

42,950 4,870 16,910

27,400 15,650 15,880

16,760 3,850 9,920

18,090 6,930 15,590

6,340 166,660 3,060 51,880 4,340 86,800

208 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Category

New South

South Western

, Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Planning and research

1,470

990

900

470

620

210 4,660

Total of principal grants

98,270 65,720

59,830 31,000 41,230 13,950 310,000

Supplementary grant

6,800

6,800

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

98,270

65,720

59,830 31,000 48,030 13,950 316,800

Other assistance (a)

1,080

840

4,636

950

1,2,61

90 8,857

Total

99,350 66,560

64,466 31,950 49,291 14,040 325,657

(a) Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Ey~e Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways, and funds for Traffic Engineering for Road Safety Improvements (TERSIPS) Program.
Table 4
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1974--75 (current prices)
$'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction National highways maintenance Export and major commercial roads

28,330 7,270

17,290 1,630

17,520
4,940 15

14,926 1,310
253

7,363 2,060 1,000

5,330 90,759 440 17,650 220 1,488

Sub-total

35,600 18,920

22,475 16,489 10,423

5,990 109,897

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads

12,190 16,870 46,590
1,809 883

4,150 13,160 35,890 1,670
870

14,740

1,200

14,200

4,790

16,090

7,510

967

483

978

1,314

5,459 (a)

12,040 9,915 18,386
467 419

2,940 47,260 4,720 63,655 4,140 128,606
12 5,408 200 4,664
5,459

Sub-total

78,342 55,740

52,434 15,297 41,227 12,012 255,052

Total

113,942 74,660

74,909 31,786 51,650 18,002 364,949

(a) In addition to the above amount, an amount of $279,000 was paid in 1974-75 under States Grants (Beef Cattle Roads) Act 1968.
Table 5 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1975-76 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction National highways maintenance Export and major commercial roads

38,351 7,306
489

16,800 1,600 4,800

22,100 5,900 1,429

18,775 2,110 1,076

10,782 2,845
900

6,983 113,791 679 20,440 511 9,205

Sub-total

46,146 23,200

29,429 21,961 14,527

8,173 143,436

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads

15,430 16,094 44,260 4,251

5,660 11,750
42,590 3,200

11,700 16,340
16,313 1,960

1,770 5,300 8,290
997

9,180 10,860 22,179
1,061

2,600 4,230 4,020
338

46,340 64,574
137,652 11,807

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 209

Category MITERS Beef roads Sub-total Total

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

2,867

2,456

2,522 9,540

1,706

1,581

900 12,032 9,540

82,902 65,656

58,375 18,063 44,861 12,088 281,945

129,048 88,856

87,804 40,024 59,388 20,261 425,381

Table 6 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1976-77 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction
Na tional highways maintenance
Export and major commercial roads

48,954 8,600 4,300

23,450 2,150 5,200

26,600 7,200 2,776

17,300 1,400 1,300

10,875 2,135 1,290

8,747 135,926 580 22,065 700 15,566

Sub-total "
Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads

61,854 30,800

15,430 18,556 36,600 4,600 4,780

4,300 10,700 39,600 3,100 2,875

36,576 20,000 14,300 10,027 173,557

11,900 14,100 15,300 2,200 2,700 9,000

3,300 5,300 7,600 1,100 1,500

8,010 12,128 20,890 1,434 1,600

2,500 4,100 3,000
310 600

45,440 64,884 122,990 12,744 14,055 9,000

Sub-total

79,966 60,575

55,200 18,800 44,062 10,510 269,113

Total

141,820 91,375

91,776 38,800 58,362 20,537 442,670

Table 7 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1977-78 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National RoadsNa tional highways construction National highways maintenance National commerce roads

States Grants (Roads) Act

56,222 8,076 6,302

26,000 3,000 3,800

29,800 8,300 2,800

15,000 1,900 1,300

15,230 4,200 1,590

7,860 150,112 900 26,376 700 16,492

Sub-total

70,600 32,800

40,900 18,200 21,020

9,460 192,980

Other RoadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

18,000 25,800 28,700
7,400 3,300

11,100 19,000 28,900
3,600 3,233

23,000 18,800 10,900 3,800 2,600

7,000 6,700 4,600 2,200 1,700

9,410 14,400 11,200 2,370
1,800

3,040 4,900 2,700 1,000
600

71,550 89,600 87,000 20,370 13,233

Sub-total

83,200 65,833

59,100 22,200 39,1!!0 12,240 281,753

Total

153,800 98,633

100,000 40,400 60,200 21,700 474,733

210 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Table 8 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1978-79 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National RoadsNational highways construction
National highways maintenance

States Grants (Roads) Act

55,787 27,806

30,414

9,855

3,209

10,332

16,133 2,032

16,980 4,200

8,149 155,269 962 30,590

National commerce roads

9,863

3,341

2,995

689

1,300

749 18,937

Sub-total

75,505 34,356

43,741 . 18,854 22,480

9,860 204,796

Other RoadsRural arterial roads
Rural local roads
Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

19,251 27,592 30,694
7,914 3,529

11,871 20,321 30,852 3,977 4,010

24,598 20,106 11,838 4,064 2,600

8,086 7,165 4,920 2,353 1,818

10,064 15,400 11,978 2,535 1,925

3,508 77,378 5,241 95,825 2,888 93,170 1,069 21,912
642 14,524

Sub-total

88,980 71,031

63,206 24,342 41,902 13,348 302,809

Total

164,485 105,387 106,947 43,196 64,382 23,208 507,605

Table 9 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1979-80 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National RoadsNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
National commerce roads

States Grants (Roads) Act

64,666 29,886

33,334

10,257 6,230

3,449 5,977

10,460 3,219

17,340 2,184 1,408

18,218 4,828 1,115

8,981 172,425 1,134 32,312
805 18,754

Sub-total

81,153 39,312

47,013 20,932 24,161 10,920 223,491

Other RoadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads
Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

20,691 29,656 32,990
8,506 3,793

12,759 21,841 31,548 4,851 4,023

26,438 21,610 12,918 4,368 2,600

8,046 7,701 5,288 2,529 1,954

10,817 16,552 12,874 2,725 2,069

3,448 82,199 5,633 102,993 3,104 98,722 1,149 24,128
690 15,129

Sub-total Total

95,636 176,789

75,022 114,334

67,934 114,947

25,518 46,450

45,037 69,198

14,024 323,171 24,944 546,662

Under the financial arrangements with the Northern Territory which came into effect on I July 1979, an amouJlt of $19 million was made available to the Northern Territory in 1979-80 by way of a Commonwealth specific purpose payment for roads. This amount was not apportioned between road categories by the Commonwealth.

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 211

Table 10 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1980-81 (current prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Northern

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory Total

National roads

94,948

Roads Grants Act 1980

48,469

54,909 24,973

29,126

12,820

12,284 277,529

Rural arterial roads

22,998 14,182

29,386

8,943 12,023

3,833

1,010 92,375

Urban arterial roads

36,138 34,040

14,594

6,330 14,338

3,535

954 109,929

Local roads

42,417 29,668

28,875 11,371 .21,427

7,538

6,871 148,167

Total

196,501 126,359

127,764 51,617 76,914 27,726 21,119 628,000

Table 11 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1972-73 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Principal GrantsUrban arterial roads

43,641 33,931

21,614 13,077 13,912

4,963 131,138

Rural arterial roads

13,865

3,856

12,355

3,011

5,338

2,392 40,817

Rural roads other than arterial roads

21,586 15,104

14,184

8,865 13,931

3,874 77,544

Planning and research

1,201

806

732

376

507

169 3,791

Total of principal grants

80,293 53,697

48,885 25,329 33,688 11,398 253,290

Supplementary grant

938

7,505

8,443

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

80,293

53,697

48,885 26,267 41,193 11,398 261,733

Other assistance (a)

5,173

938

1,805

7,916

Total

80,293 53,697

54,058 27,205 42,998 11,398 269,649

(a) Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways.
Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE report'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

Table 12 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1973-74 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Principal GrantsUrhan arterial roads

44,686 34,820

22,213 13,587 14,666

5,140 135,112

Rural arterial roads

14,203

3,948

12,687

3,121

5,618

2,481 42,058

Rural roads other than arterial roads

19,587 13,709

12,874

8,042 12,639

3,518 70,369

212 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Planning and research

1,192

802

730

381

502

170 3,777

Total of principal grants

79,668 53,279

48,504 25,131 33,425 11,309 251,316

Supplementary grant

5,513

5,513

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

79,668

53,279

48,504 25,13\ 38,938 11,309 256,829

Other assistance (a)

876

681

3,758

770

1,022

73 7,180

Total

80,544 53,960

52,262 25,901 39,960 11,382 264,009

(a) Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways, and funds for Traffic Engineering for Road Safety Improvements (TERSIPS) Program.
Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

Table 13 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1974-75 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commercial roads

19,209 4,930

11,723 1,105

11,879 3,350
10

10,121 888 172

4,992 1,397
678

3,614 298 149

61,538 11,968
1,009

Sub-total

24,139 12,828

15,239 11,181

7,067

4,061 74,515

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads

8,265 11,439 31,590 1,227
599

2,814 8,923 24,335 1,132
590

9,994 9,628 10,910
656 663 3,701 (a)

814 3,248 5,092
327 891

8,164 6,723 12,467
317 284

1,993 3,200 2,807
8 136

32,044 43,161 87,201
3,667 3,163 3,701

Sub-total

53,120 37,794

35,552 10,372 27,955

8,144 172,937

Total

77,259 50,622

50,791 21,553 35,022 12,205 247,452

(a) In addition to the above amount, an amount of $279,000 ($189,000 in 1971/72 prices) was paid in 1974/75 under States Grants (B;~fCattleRoads) Act 1968.
Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment ofthe Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

Table 14 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1975-76 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenance

23,401 4,458

10,251 976

13,485 3,600

11,456 1,287

6,579 1,736

4,261 69,433 414 12,471

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 213

Category
Export and major commercial roads
Sub-total
Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads
Sub-total
Total

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

298

2,929

872

657

549

312 5,617

28,157 14,156

17,957 13,400

8,864

4,987 87;521

9,415 9,820 27,006 2,594 1,749

3,453 7,169 25,987 1,953 1,499

50,584 78,741

40,061 54,217

7,139 9,970 9,954 1,196 1,539 5,821
35,619
53,576

1,080 3,234 5,058
609 1,041
11,022 24,422

5,602 6,626 13,533
647 965
27,373
36,237

1,586 2,581 2,453
206 549

28,275 39,400 83,991 7,205 7,342
5,821

7,375 172,034

12,362 259,555

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part I').

TlIble15 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1976-77 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commercial roads

27,100 4,761 2,380

12,981 1,190 2,879

14,725 3,986 1,537

9,577 775 720

6,020 1,182
714

4,842 321 388

75,245 12,215 8,618

Sub-total

34,241 17,050

20,248 11,072

7,916

5,551 96,078

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads

8,542 10,272 20,262 2,546 2,646

2,380 5,923 21,922 1,716 1,592

6,5887,805 8,470 1,218 1,495 4,982

1,827 2,934 4,207
608 831

4,434 6,714 11,564
794 886

1,384 2,270 1,660
172 332

25,155 35,918 68;085
7,054 7,782 4,982

Sub-total

44,268 33,533

30,558 10,407 24,392

5,818 148,976

Total

78,509 50,583

50,806 21,479 32,308 11,369 245,054

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part I').

Table 16 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1977-78 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National roadsNational highways construction
National highways maintenance

States Grants (Roads) Act

28,940 4,157

13,384 1,544

15,340 4,272

7,721 978

7;840 2,162

4,046 77,271 463 13,576

214 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National commerce roads

3,244

1,956

1,441

669

818

360 8,488

Sub-total

36,341 16,884

21,053

9,368 10,820

4,869 99,335

Other roadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads MITERS

9,266 13,281 14,713
3,809 1,699

5,714 9,780 14,876 1,853 1,664

11,839 9,671 5,612 1,956
1,338

3,603 3,449 2,368 1,132
875

4,844 7,412 5,765 1,220
927

1,565 2,522 1,390
515 309

36,831 46,121 44,784
10,485 6,812

Sub-total

42,828 33,887

30,422 11,427 20,168

6,301 145,033

Total

79,169 50,771

51,475 20,795 30,988 11,170 244,368

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').
Table 17 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1978-79 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National roadsNational highways construction National highways maintenance National commerce roads

States Grants (Roads) Act

26,834 4,740 4,744

13,375 1,544 1,606

14,629 4,970 1,441

7,760 971 331

8,167 2,020
626

3,920 463 360

74,685 14,714 9,108

Sub-total

36,318 16,525

21,040

9,068 10;813

4,743 98,507

Other roadsRural arterial roads
Rural local roads
Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads MITERS

9,260 13,272 14,764
3,807 1,697

5,710 9,714 14,840 1,913 1,929

11,832 9,671 5,694 1,955 1,251

3,889 3,447 2,367 1,132
874

4,841 7,408
5,761 1,219
926

1,687 2,521 1,389
514 309

37,219 46,093 44,815 10,540
6,986

Sub-total

42,800 34,166

30,403 11,709 20,155

6,420 145,653

Total

79,118 50,691

51,443 20,771 30,968 11,163 244,160

Current price figures adjusted on basis of Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE

Report'An Assessment of the Australian Roali System: 1979 Part 1').

' ,'.

Table 18 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1979-80 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

National roadsNational highways construction National highways maintenance
National commerce roads

States Grants (Roads) Act

27,941 '4,432
2,692

12,913 1,490 2,583

14,403 4,520 1,391

7,493 944 608

7,872 2,086
482

3,881 74,503 490 13,962 348 8,104

Sub-total

35,065 16,986

20,314

9,045 10,440

4,719, , 96,569

Other roadsRural arterial roads

8,940

5,513

11,424

3,471

4,674

1,490 35,518

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 215

Category

New South

South Western

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Total

Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

12,814 14,255
3,675 1,639

9,437 13,632
2,096 1,738

9,338 5,582
1,887 1,123

3,328 2,285 1,093
844

7,152 5,563
1,177 894

2,434 1,341
497 298

44,503 42,658 10,425 6,536

Sub-total

41,323 32,416

29,354 11,027 19,460

6,060 139,640

Total

76,388 49,402

49,668 20,072 29,900 10,779 236,209

Current price figures adjusted on basis of actual movement during 1979-80 in prices in Implicit Price Deflator of Gross Fixed Capital Expenditure on Private Non-dwelling Construction (see p. 15 Australian Bureau of Statistics 'Quarterly Estimates of National Income and Expenditure, Australia, June Quarter 1980') and the Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment ofthe Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').
Table 19 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1980-81 (1971-72 prices) $'000

Category

New South

South Western

Northern

Wales Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory Total

National roads Rural arterial roads Urban arterial roads Local roads

36,960 8,952 14,067 16,513

Roads Grants Act 1980

18,868

21,374

5,521

11,439

13,250

5,681

11,549

11,240

9,721 3,481 2,464 4,427

11,338 4,680 5,581 8,341

4,990 1,492 1,376
2,934

4,782 108,033 393 35,958 371 42,790
2,675 57,679

Total

76,492 49,188

49,734 20,093 29,940 10,792

8,221 244,460

Current price figures adjusted on basis of forecast movement in the Implicit Price Deflator of Gross Fixed Capital Expenditure on Private Non-dwelling Construction during 1980-81 and the Bureau of Transport Economics Road Construction Price Index (see p. 121 BTE Report 'An Assessment of the Australian Road System: 1979 Part 1').

Training for Examiners ofAirmen
, (Question No. 306)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) When, where and for what precise periods will Boeing 727 and Douglas DC9 aircraft conversion training for examiners of airmen be provided under the terms of contracts RPTB 15 and RPTB 16 referred to on page 59 of Commonwealth ofAustralia Gazelle No. G48 at a costof$46,197.00.
(2) How many Departmental officers are' to receive training under the contracts.
(3) Why has it been found appropriate to utilise the services of Eastern Airlines Incorporated of Florida, U.S,A., rather than Australian airlines.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) B727: 29 September-3 October 1980.
(b) DC9: 20ctober-2 November 1980.
The training location is Miami, Florida, U.S.A. (2) Three.
(3) Utilisation of Eastern Airlines' services is more attractive economically.
Hire of Boeing 707 Aircraft
(Question No. 309)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

(I) What were the circumstances that resulted in Contract 5/1/450 at a cost of $16,642 referred to on page 60 of Commonwealth of Australia Gazelle No. G48 being let to Air Niugini for the hire of a Boeing 707 aircraft.
(2) Why are the 2 Boeing 707 aircraft used by the Prime Minister not being used for the training of Examiners of Airmen.
(3) At what locations and for what periods is it proposed that the Air Niugini Boeing 707 will be used.
(4) On what previous occasions and at what cost have Boeing 707 aircraft been.hired by his Department since 1975.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Boeing 707 aircraft was hired in accordance with the Department of Transport's safety surveillance program, which requires Examiners of Airmen to maintain proficiency on the various types of regular public transport aircraft. At the time, my Department was responsible for the oversight of Air Niugini's B707 operations.
(2) Consideration was given to the use of the 2 Boeing 707 aircraft of No. 34 Squadron RAAF. However, it is highly desirable that'aircraft used of type proficiency maintenance be operated by a commercial airline, as these aircraft represent the environment in which airline operations are monitored by my Department. By contracting for the use of commercial aircraft, it is possible to provide more effective check pilot surveillance, which is part of the safety surveillance program.
(3) (a) Port Moresby.
(b) Four hours.

216 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) (a) Examiners of Airmen are required to acquit 12 hours flying annually to maintain type proficiency on Boeing 707 aircraft. Acquittal of this time, fol\owingplacement of the contracts, is arranged by mutual agreement between the contracted airline and the Department.
(b) 1975/76-$51,640, 1976/17-$26,560, 1977 /78-$32,400,1978/79-$23,400,1979/80-$16,722.
Disabled Children
(Question No. 317)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Has favourable consideration been given to establishing a separate Federal ministerial portfolio and department to deal with matters of concern to the disabled, as recommended as a matter of urgency in the Report by the National Women's Advisory Council entitled My Child was Born Disabled.
(2) If so, will the proposed ministerial portfolio have the functions outlined in the report.
(3) If the recommendation is not accepted, what alternative measures does the Government propose to take to deal with the problems of the disabled.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government has a long standing commitment to programs of assistance which improve the welfare of disabled people. During 1981, the International Year of Disabled Persons, particular emphasis is being given to improving the opportunities and choices available to the disabled, in accordance with the Year's objectives of full participation and equality. Aid to the handicapped will be 'strengthened and a number of special measures to assist handicapped people to playa full part in society have been announced. These include , a major campaign to provide work and training opportunities for disabled people, and a program providing aids for daily living. In addition, a national pUblicity campaign will aim at increasing the community's awareness of the problems, needs and abilities of disabled people.
The National Women's Advisory Council report, 'My Child was Born Disabled' was tabled in Parliament on 2 December 1980. While the Government has not yet considered the recommendations of the Report, a number of representations have been received on the question of a separate Ministerial portfolio responsible for matters concerning disabled people. The Government considers that services for disabled persons are at present adequately administered by the Departments of Social Security and Health. The need for changes to the structure of Commonwealth administration is, however, kept under continuing review.
Public Service-Married Couples
(Question No. 348)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, as Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Is it a fact that married couples working within the sallie Government department offices are required to fill out a form requesting that one of the partners may collect the pay of the other each time collection of this kin" is required by the married couple?
(2) Is it possible for married couples to sign one form allowing either partner to collect the other partner's pay on any pay day during the period in which they are both employed in the Commonwealth Public Service, or until such time as they request otherwise? If not, why not?

Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following information in answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Employees may select a mode for payment of salary from the following alternatives-
Cash Cheque Payment to a bank account operated by an officer in his own name or jointly with a married partner, or Payment to an account maintained by the officer with an approved credit union or building society.
In cases where an employee, who receives his/her salary in cash, cannot be at the normal place of work on pay day a procedure exists whereby that employee may personally authorise, by completing an Order to Pay Agent (Form 19), another employee to collect that particular pay.
(2) The procedures, which are designed to protect the interests of the Commonwealth and the employee, require in the case of payment of salaries or wages in cash, the identification of the payee by the paying officer in the presence of a witnessing officer. If in the temporary absence of an employee the Order to Pay Agent procedure is used, the paying officer is required to produce the Form 19 to acquit the cash advance. The agent is required to receipt the order and the witnessing officer to witness both the payment and the signature on each occasion.
The number of married couples being both employed in the same Department would be small and would not warrant departure from a proven system of sound internal control.
Ballot Papers and How-to-vote Cards
(Question No. 349)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will the Government consider amending the Commonwealth Electoral Act to include (a) the name of a political party where that name consists of no more than four words, alongside the name of the candidate on the ballot paper issued for Senate and House of Representatives elections and (b) the display of each candidate's how-to-vote card prominently inside polling booths on the condition that cards comply with certain standards of size of paper and print; if not, why not.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As I stated in Parliament on 2 December 1980 (Hansard, page 227), the Chief Australian Electoral Officer and I are examining the Commonwealth Electoral Act and the conduct and administration of elections. This review is still in progress.
The matters raised will be considered in the context of this review.
Qantas Airways Ltd: Fare Increases
(Question No. 351)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to reports of continued complaints from present and past chairmen of Qantas about an inability to obtain approval from the Commonwealth Government for fare increases within a reasonable time of lodgement of application; if so, is there any substance to the complaints.

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 217

(2) What were the dates of (a) lodgement and (b) approval of fare increase applications lodged by Qantas in the period from 1 January 1979 to 31 October 1980.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There have been press reports about delays in Qantas obtaining approval from the Commonwealth Department of Transport for fare increases within a reasonable time of the application. I have discussed these reports with the current and previous chairmen of Qantas. While there have been isolated instances of delays associated with approvals, the majority of filings have been determined without any delay and

approved with effectiveness date as proposed in the filing. Therefore, there is little substance in these reports.
(2) There have been a large number of different fare increase applications lodged with the Department of Transport in the period from I January 1979 to 31 October 1980. These have related to both specific routes and groups of routes. The most important of these have been the six general fare increase applications lodged by Qantas on behalf of other carriers and associated with the substantial increases in fuel costs. The proposed and actual effectiveness dates of fare increases in relation to the fuel cost increases over this period are as follows:

Fuel increase*

Effectiveness date sought by Qantas

Decision announced to industry

Actual effectiveness
date

I 2
3 4 United States
New Zealand Others
5 6 United Kingdom, Europe, South West Pacific
United States
New Zealand ASEAN**

1.5.79 1.9.79
1.1.80 1.3.80 1.3.80
1.4.80 1.7.80 1.9.80
15.9.80 1.9.80
1.9.80

21.5.79 23.8.79 12.12.79
15.2.80 7.3.80 22.3.80
\3.6.80 15.8.80 22.9.80
13.11.80 1.12.80

5.6.79 6.9.79 1.1.80
1.3.80 22.3.80
5.4.80
1.7.80 1.9.80 7.10.80
1.12.80 14.12.80

* Qantas filings based on lATA worldwide conferences convened to consider cost increases. ** Delay due to requirement at that time for ASEAN Government approval.

Airport Baggage Trolleys
(Question No. 357)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) How many baggage trolleys for use by incoming passengers at each international airport in Australia (a) are now available and (b) were available on 30 June in (i) 1978 (ii) 1979 and (iii) 1980.
(2) Who is responsible for supply of the trolleys.
(3) What is the approximate cost of each trolley.
(4) Has any action been taken to overcome the shortage of trolleys at Kingsford-Smith Airport NSW, since June 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Brisbane, 120; Sydney, 400; Melbourne, 270; Darwin, 10; Perth, 100
(b) (i) Brisbane, 20; Sydney, 200; Melbourne, 190; Darwin, 22; Perth, 75.
(ii) Brisbane, 70; Sydney, 200; Melbourne, 180; Darwin, 22; Perth, 100
(iii) Brisbarie, 70; Sydney, 200; Melbourne, 170; Darwin, 10; Perth, 100.
(2) The Department of Transport.
(3) Trolleys are now being supplied at no cost to the Commonwealth in return for advertising rights.
(4) One hundred trolleys were delivered to Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport during December 1980, and a further 100 during January and February 1981.
Additional trolleys have been ordered for delivery as soon as possible to:

Brisbane, 50; Darwin, 100; Perth, 100; Melbourne, 200.
Disabled Persons
(Question No. 360)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Has the Government accepted the need to facilitate the provision of diverse types of temporary and permanent accommodation for disabled people which would include (a) independent living units, (b) small homes in decelltralised areas for the aged disabled, close to their families and friends, (c) houses within easy reach of families and friends which provide a normalising environment for those disabled people who need to live away from home for educational or other purposes with frequent family contact being a feature of these houses, (d) small regional hostels which closely resemble a family environment and which (i) employ suitably qualified staff with special insights into the needs of the disabled and who would deal with all aspects of their care and (ii) also provide in-service training programs for all individuals involved with care of the disabled, (e) pilot schemes to provide housemanagement services in hostels, homes for individuals or group homes and (f) accommodation facilities with homelike surroundings attached to local hospitals.
(2) If so, what action does the Government propose to take to implement policies to provide this type of accommodation.
(3) Are additional or alternate measures to improve the accommodation facilities of the disabled to be introduced; if so, what are they.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

218 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) to (3) The Government has accepted the need to facilitate the provision of diverse types of permanent and temporary accommodation for disabled people, and a number of programs designed to assist in providing this accommodation are administered by my department as well as by other Commonwealth Government departments, State Government departments and voluntary agencies.
In regard to my department, funds are provided direct to voluntary, non-profit, or religious organisations for the provision of accommodation for disabled people under the relevant provisions of the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act and the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act. Every effort is made within the funds available to ensure that a range of accommodation appropriate to the needs of disabled people is developed.
Disabled Persons
(Question No. 365)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
As 1981 is the International Year of Disabled Persons, what arrangements have been made to have new telephone aids and laachinery developed for the handicapped made accessible by (a) installing them in public places or (b) giving consideration to special financial concessions to enable their purchase or hire.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Installations in public places
(i) Proposed introduction of a hearing aid coupler into the new type public telephone
All public telephones are currently being replaced by a new instrument, the latest version of which will be fitted with a handset incorporating a hearing aid coupler.
(ii) Public Telephones and Public Telephone Booths
Telecom is currently evaluating various modifications both to public telephone instruments and to booths. The modifications include:
altering the height of the telephone instrument, installing "drive-in" telephones, modifying full length cabinets to enable access by wheelchair, introducing half length cabinets in suitable locations.
Some prototype units have already been installed for testing purposes in carefully selected protected sites. The provision of any of the modifications on a wide basis will be dependent on the type of facilities required by disabled users in particular geographical areas, and upon the resistance of the instruments to vandalism and mis-use.
(b) Tariff concessions
(i) Special Rental Rates for products designed for the disabled
Products designed specifically for use by disabled people for example, the Gliding Tone Caller and the Volume Control Telephone, are rented at a rate which either just covers Telecom's'costs or is actually "below cost". There is no rental charge for the Hearing Aid Coupler while a Large Number Dial Ring, which assists customers with low vision, is available free of charge from Telecom Business Offices.
(ii) Concessional Installation Rates

From 1st September 1980, a.20% discount has applied to the installation fee chargeable for miscellaneous items of telephone equipm~nt (i.e., over and above the basic instrument) where this equipment is required in order for a disabled person to adequately use the telephone.
The granting of the concessional rate is not dependent upon the recipient being the actual subscriber to the telephone service. This means that the parents of a disabled dependent would be eligible, as would a disabled person at his or her place uf employment.
(iii) Waiving of Evaluation Fees for Privately Supplied Equipment
Before privately owned and maintained equipment can be connected to the network, it must first be submitted to Telecom for examination and the issue of an Authority to Connect. However, should the equipment be designed primarily for the use of disabled people, the fee chargeable for technical evaluation is waived.
(iv) Touchfone Concessions
Special concessions apply to a Touchfone where it is to be used by disabled people who qualify under conditions specified by the Department of Social Security. In cases where approval is granted by the Department of Social Security, Telecom waives the additional annual rental While the Department of Social Security meets the once-only charge of $20 and the installation fee.
Other Telecom planned projects to assist disadvantaged users and which form part of its contribution to the 1981 International Year of Disabled Persons include:
(i) Release of the Porta-Printer II as a distributorship product
Porta-Printer II is a telephone typewriter for profoundly deaf people and is available to the public through a private company, Intercept Communications, Camberwell, Victoria. Telecom is to act as a distributing agent for the company as soon as an appropriate agreement has been concluded.
(ii) Digital Display Dialler
This product has been conceived and designed by a voluntary group to enable access to the telephone network by people with severe upper limb disabilities. It has been field researched by Telecom for user acceptance and the design has reached the prototype stage.
(iii) Display and Advisory Centres
During 19i1l, Telecom will establish Display and Advisory Centres which will be staffed by specialized personnel to provide an improved consultancy service to disabled people.
(iv) Report 'Disabled People and Telecommunications'
This report was commissioned to determine the needs and preferences of persons who have a physical disability or handicap with respect to the use of readily available telecommunications equipment, and to quantify the various needs for special facilities by disabled users of the telephone. The report will be re. leased early in 1981.
(v) Booklet 'Telephone Services for Special Needs'
This booklet details products available in Australia to aid disabled people in their use of the telephone. It will be available through Telecom Business Offices early in 1981.

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 219

(vi) Information Film on Telecom Products and Services for the Disabled
A 7 minute film has been produced to give information on the products and services available through Telecom. This film is available on request to interested organisations.
International Labour Organisation Conventions: Aboriginal Employment and Land Rights
(Question No.5)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations; upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(l) Was Convention No. !07-lndigenous and Tribal Populations, 1957, among the 5 InternationalLabour Organisation Conventions involving State jurisdiction to which the Federal and State Labour Ministers in 1973 a.ccorded top priority for ratification. (Hansard, 16 September 1976, page 1193).
(2) Can he say whether Queensland still refuses to agree to ratification to which New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia agreed in 1967 and Western Australia in 1974. (Hansard, 25 May 1978, page 2578).
(3) Is he also able to say whether the Queenslarid Treaties Commission has made any further report on the Convention since its report tabled in the Queensland Parliament on 9 December 1976. (Hansard, 25 May 1978, page 2578).
(4) Is he also able to say whether the Prime Minister and the Queensland Premier have corresponded on the ownership of land aspects of the Convention since April 1976 (Hf,Insard, 15 February 1977, page 87); ifso (a) on what dates; and (b) with what results.
(5) Have the Federal and State Labour Ministers considered the Convention in the last 5 years; if SQ (a) on what occasions and (b) with what results.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. As foreshadowed in my predecessor's reply to Parliamentary Question (No. !O27; Hansard, 16 September 1976, page 1194) at the request of the Ministers of Labour, the officers reviewed the order of priority previously agreed, and in February 1979, the Ministers agreed to a revised order of priority for consideration of unratified Conventions according to new criteria. Convention No. 107 was allocated to Category B which covers Conventions considered to have good ratification prospects, immediate ratification being precluded by minor legislative impediments or difficulties in one or two jurisdictions only.
(2) The Queensland Government has not refused to agree to ratification of Convention No. !O7.
(3) I am informed that no such further report has been made but the honourable member may wish to pursue this matter with the Minister for Employment and Labour Relations in Queensland.
(4) (a) and (b) I am advised that the Premier of Queensland replied to the Prime Minister's letter of 12 April 1976 on the 'ownership of land' aspects of the Convention on l8 May 1977. In that correspondence, the Premier indicated that the position presently obtaining in Queensland accorded with the spirit of the Convention and that the Queensland Government had no objection to the Commonwealth Government proceeding to ratification of the Convention.
(5) See answer to (I), above.

Labour Relations (Public Service) Convention
(Question No. 88)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Has the Government ratified the International Labour Organisation's Labour Relations (Public Service) Convention and Recommendation 1978.
(2) If not, is ratification (a) under consideration, (b) being rejected by the Government, or (c) being made a future option.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) I am advised that ratification of ILO Convention No. 151 is under consideration in consultation with the States.
Office of Child Care
(Question No. 113)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Which recommendations made since December 1977 from the Office of Child Care has the Government (a) accepted and (b) rejected.
(2) Which recommendations does it still have under consideration.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) and (2) The Office of Child Care is a part of the Department of Social Security and thus its advice and recommendations are integral to the normal departmental advisory mechanisms to Government. Under long standing convention such advice is not disclosed.
Repatriation
(Question No. 123)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Which of the recommendations made by the Senate Standing Committee on Health and Welfare in its report on Repatriation (Senate Hansard, 7 November 1973, page l575) (a) have been implemented, (b) are still under consideration and (cl' have been rejected by the Government.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
The action taken in respect of each individual recommendation in the Senate Standing Committee report is as follows:
Recommendation No. I
"Payment of Repatriation pensions be made through the Social Security Department and that the Repatriation Commission be retained to handle the determining of claims, reviews and administration."
Action Taken
After full consideration of the proposal it was decided to take no action on this recommendation.

220 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Recommendation No.2 "The determination of entitlements should initially rest with a senior statutory officer of the Repatriation Commission specially appointed for the purpose. Initially, he should base his determination on the personal case records including reports from medical officers and all other relevant evidence."
Action Taken
This recommendation was considered. On the first point, after taking into account the views of ex-service organisations it was decided to retain the Repatriation Boards in their present form.
As to the second point, the Boards have always based their determinations on the personal case records of the veteran including reports from medical officers and all other relevant evidence.
Recommendation No.3 "Appeal should be to:
an 'independent Appeal Tribunal' to which questions based on relevant facts will normally be referred. The independent Appeal Tribunal should be appointed by the Governor-General and should consist of three people, one at least of whom should be a qualified legal practitioner, one representing community interests and one by national ex-service organisations; and
to a judge of the Court sitting alone on questions of law."
Action Taken The Repatriation Review Tribunal, an independent statutory tribunal to which members are appointed by the Governor-General, was set up in 1979 and generally reflects the tenor of the recommendations, but no representatives of 'community interests' have been appointed. 'Service members' are appointed from lists submitted by bodies representing returned servicemen throughout Australia. Provision was made in 1979 amendments for access to the Federal Court of Australia for determination of questions oflaw.
Recommendations Nos. 4 and 5
"Claimants contemplating an appeal to either body should be provided with independent advice at Commonwealth expense. The facilities of the Legal Service Bureau should be extended to every State to provide appropriate service." "If a Legal Service Bureau officer advises an appeal to a Court, expenses should be paid by the Commonwealth. Claimants acting on their own account should be required to bear the costs of appeal to the Court, but would be entitled to claim reimbursement of costs of successful appeals."
Action Taken These are matters for my colleague, the Attorney-General. However, I understand some assistance is provided to claimants and appellants from time to time.
Recommendation No.6 "The appellant or his advocate may attend before the Appeal Tribunal if desired, but must appear, if requested, with suitable penalties for failure to comply without reasonable excuse."
Action Taken The appellant has a right either to appear in person or to be represented by an advocate before the Repatriation Review Tribunal and the Tribunal has a right to summon witnesses. Whether it requires the presence of the appellant in person in a particular case is a matter for decision by the Tribunal. The Act provides for suitable penalties for failure to comply without reasonable excuse.

Recommendation No.7 "The Repatriation Commission should be represented at appeals to state its case."
Action Taken Tile Repatriation Commission does exercise its right to appear before the new Repatriation Review Tribunal where it considers it necessary.
Recommendation No.8 "All service documents, medical opinions and reports should be accessible in the office of the Department to an appellant's advocate and any medical adviser, authorised by the appellant".
Action Taken Departmental files, including service documents and medical reports, are accessible by arrangement through Branch Offices to the appellant or to his advocate or medical adviser.
Recommendation No.9 "Hearing of appeals should be in public unless otherwise determined by the tribunal".
Action Taken Hearings by the Repatriation Review Tribunal are held in private but may be held in public at the request of the appellant.
Recommendation No. 10 "Evidence should be taken on oath".
Action Taken The Repatriation Review Tribunal, the Repatriation Boards and the Repatriation Commission have the power to take evidence on oath; this is seldom exercised.
Recommendation No. 11 "A record of deliberations should be taken".
Action Taken The Repatriation Review Tribunal records proceedings in respect of a hearing before it.
Recommendation No. 12 "Written reasons for decision should be given as well as a brief statement of relevant facts and references to relevant legislation and be available to claimants and appellants in cases determined adversely. Consideration should also be given to the provision of reasons for accepted cases".
Action Taken Reasons for decisions are given by all statutory Repatriation determining authorities.
Recommendation No. 13 "An applicant be entitled to the benefit of any reasonable doubt".
Action Taken The applicant receives the benefit of any reasonable doubt by virtue of the provisions of sections 47 and 107vH of the Repatriation Act 1920 which require that a claim or appeal be granted or allowed unless the determining authority is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there are insufficient grounds for granting the claim or allowing the appeal.
Recommendation No. 14 "In all cases, the 'onus of proof' shall rest on the Repatriation Commission".

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 221

Action Taken No onus of proof is now placed upon the Repatriation determining authorities. However, the provisions of sections 47 and 107vH of the Repatriation Act 1920 require a high standard of disproof in the minds of the various determining bodies before a claim can be refused. See also comment on recommendation 15 below.
Recommendation No. 15 "Section 47 of the Act regarding 'onus of proof, be reviewed by the Repatriation Commission twelve months after Determining Authorities start to give reasons for decisions. By that time, it should be clear whether the onus of proof provision is properly invoked in the determination of entitlements. The Commission should make a report of its review back to the Senate Standing Committee on Health and Welfare".
Action Taken In order to clarify and rationalise the provisions of section 47 of the Repatriation Act 1920 which set out the basis on which claims for pensions are determined, particularly the provisions relating to onus of proof and benefit of the doubt, a new section was substituted on 16 June 1977. Section 47 now provides that the Repatriation Commission or a Repatriation Board shall grant a claim or allow an appeal, unless it is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there are insufficient grounds for so doing. A similar amendment was incorporated into the Repatriation Act 1920 on 28 March 1979 to apply to th'e Repatriation Review Tribunal.
Recommendation No. 16 "A new formula for a unified scale of war pensions be established in which the present Special (T &PI) Rate be identified as 100 per cent, with lower assessments expressed as percentages ofthat rate".
Action Taken Various possibilities relating to the Repatriation pensions structure have been considered but no action has been taken as yet to introduce a new pension structure.
Recommendation No. 17 "The Special Compensation Allowance should be incorporated into the new unified pension scale".
Action Taken Special Compensation Allowance was abolished in November "1974. The cancellation was balanced in most cases by a corresponding increase in disability pension.
Recommendation No. 18 "All pension assessments, including those for total incapacity should have regard to a medical and/or rehabilitation assessment of incapacity taking into account the degree of incapacity, unemployability and quality oflife".
Action Taken All disability pension assessments under Repatriation legislation are based on loss of function and on the restriction of ability to engage in employment. Assessment is determined by comparing the condition of the disabled person with that of a normal person of the same age and sex and measures the general handicap of the disabled person. The assessment takes into account the less obvious effects such as interference with social and recreational life.
Recommendation No. 19 "Section 37 of the Repatriation Act concerning special provisions regarding tuberculosis be repealed".

Action Taken Section 37 of the Repatriation Act 1920 was repealed on I November 1978.

Recommendation No. 20
'The Repatriation Commission should undertake regular review of all pensions, other than ,fixed statutory rates, e.g. certain amputees, at not more than five yearly intervals and may review a case at any time on receipt of further evidence. (Special attention should be paid to curable conditions) '.

Action Taken
Apart from a limited number of reviews in certain cases, no regular overall review is undertaken.

Recommendation No. 21

'There should be an investigation into the relative merits of

a payment, optional or otherwise, of a fair and reasonable

lump sum compensation as an alternative to the continuing

payment of minor pensions having due regard to the possible

deterioration of the conditions and the right to reapply for

compensation and/or medical treatment'.

'

Action Taken
A number of alternatives to the present method of payment of minor pensions has been considered but no suitable alternative to the present system has been devised. The matter is still under consideration.

Recommendation No. 22

'A panel of medical experts be appointed on a national basis by the responsible Minister to:

draw up a schedule of the aetiology of diseases, including

a specification of diseases Which cannot be causally related

to war service;

review such schedules regularly; and

appoint sub-committees of appropriate medical status

and specialty, to review and report on cases when requested by the Repatriation Commission or an Appeal Tribunal.

The report of the sub-committee should be passed to the statutory authority requesting the review. A request by an appellant to an Appeal Tribunal for such review, should be

referred to the Tribunal, which, at its discretion, may re-

questthe review'.

.

Action Taken
(i) While a formal panel of medical experts has not been appointed on a. national basis, the services of appropriate specialists from most States have been used in the preparation of a Guide to the Aetiology of Diseases and in its subsequent revision which is a continuous process.
(ii) After due consideration, it appears impracticable to draw up a specification of diseases which cannot be casually related to war service.
(iii) Medical Boards are constituted to report on cases when requested by the Repatriation Commission or by the Repatriation Review Tribunal.

Recommendation No. 23
'Repatriation hospitals be integrated into a National General Hospital Scheme'.

Action Taken
No action has been taken on this recommendation. However, there has been a continuing development of the close links already in existence between Repatriation hospitals and their counterparts in the community in order to avoid unnecessary duplication of resoUrces.

222 REPRESENTATIVES 25 February 1981

Answers to Questions

Recommendation No. 24 'All persons for whom pension liability has been accepted should be referred to a rehabilitiation unit for assessment of residual disability and if necessary, for treatment, and that no final assessment should be made until treatment is completed. These cases are reviewable after 6 months or on presentation of further written evidence which is material to and has substantial bearing upon the assessment'.
Action Taken As part of the compensation provided to veterans who have service-related disabilities, any rehabilitative steps, medical or otherwise, considered necessary or desirable are taken to restore them to a normal state of health. To refer all disability pensioners to a rehabilitation unit would be impracticable and unnecessary as in many cases it would not be appropriate or provide any benefit.
Recommendation No. 25 'Failure to comply with the direction to a rehabilitation unit should result in suspension or loss bf pension'.
Action Taken The Repatriation legislation provides that a pension may be cancelled in such instances.
Recommendation No. 26 'The Committee strongly recommends implementation of the Senate Report on Physically and Mentally Handicapped Persons in which it recommended that rehabilitation units should be established in all public hospitals and that a Rehabilitation Commission be set up and be responsible to the Prime Minister for the purpose of co-ordinating all efforts'.
Action Taken A Repatriation General Hospital is located in the capital city of each State. Each Repatriation General Hospital has a Department of Rehabilitiation.
Recommendation No. 27 'Any person whose pension has been reduced or discontinued following rehabilitation assessment, treatment or review, may reapply if his condition deteriorates'.
Action Taken Under Repatriation legislation, any disability pensioner who suffers a reduction or cancellation in pension following review has recourse to appeal rights or may reapply if the condition deteriorates.
Recommendation No. 28 'Effort should be made to encourage ambulant patients to use public transport to the fullest possible extent in the interests of their rehabilitation'.
Action Taken The use of public transport is encouraged where it is considered appropriate to the patient's particular circumstances and is likely to have a rehabilitative effect.
Recommendation No. 29 'Because of the amendments recommended above and their effects on other provisions, the Act should be redrafted and consolidated'.
Action Taken The Repatriation Act 1920 has recently been reprinted in a consolidated form and copies are now available. No action has been taken to redraft the Act.

Recommendation No. 30 'There should be a change in emphasis from pension compensation to rehabilitation'.
Action Taken The need for rehabilitation of disabled veterans is always well in the minds of medical officers and other members of the Department's treatment services. Also, compensation by way of pension and other allowances for disabilities accepted as associated with war service is a statutory obligation. These matters are therefore complementary.
Recommendation No. 31 'There should be a simplification and clarification of existing provisions for participation in different warlike conflicts and clearly understood definitions and guidelines should be incorporated'.
Action Taken Due to the complex nature of the Repatriation legislation this would be difficult to achieve and no action has been taken in this regard.
Commonwealth Purchases
(Question No. 203)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(I) Did his predecessor state on 22 May 1980 when introducing the Preference to Australian Goods (Commonwealth Authorities) Bill 1980 (Hansard, page 3088) that purchases by Commonwealth Departments of State are estimated at about $I,500m per annum and purchases by Commonwealth authorities are estimated at about $3,300m per annum.
(2) Will he provide more details on (a) departments' purchases, (b) authorities' purchases, (c) the origins of goods purchased and (d) any other statistical information available.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) While it is not appropriate to load the Hansard with these detailed statistics I have forwarded readily available information on Commonweath purchases to the honourable member direct.
Vietnam: Operation Phoenix
(Question No. 222)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the report headed Diggers Worked for CIA-official on page 3 of the Melbourne Herald, 26 November 1980.
(2) How many Australian troops were involved with Operation Phoenix, what were their respective ranks at the time, and what was the total length of time in which Australian troops were involved with either Operation Phoenix or the Civil Operations and Rural Development Support Program.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to evidence given to the United States of America Senate Foreign Relations Committee by Mr William Colby in 1970 that, inter alia, 19,534 Viet Cong political cadres had been neutralised, in 1969, including 6,187 killed, as a result of the Operation Phoenix program.

Answers to Questions

25 February 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 223

(4) In view of the seriousness of the allegations implied in the Melbourne Herald article, can he give an unqualified assurance that no Australian troops were involved in these reported killings.
(5) Have any legal or other investigations of this matter been carried out by his Department or any other Federal Department; if so, what were they.
(6) Were any Australian troops responsible for detaining Vietnamese persons under the An-Tri detention system.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) Operation Phoenix was designed to destroy the Viet Cong infrastructure in South Vietnam and in that sense involved all Government of South Vietnam and allied forces in country at any particular time during the programme.
(b) Within the Australian Army Training Team, Vietnam, there were about six advisers at anyone time working with the Provincial Reconnaissance Units. Their ranks ranged from Major to Warrant Officer Class Two, and this involvement was for a period of approximately two years from mid-1968.
(3) Yes.
(4) See2 (a) above.
(5) No investigation of Australian involvement in Operation Phoenix has been carried out by the Department of Defence.
(6) Australians were required to hand over their prisoners to the South Vietnamese authorities and were therefore not responsible for decisions concerning detention or release. The An-Tri laws were Vietnamese civil laws.
Occupational Health and Safety
(Question No. 264)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(I) Is it a fact that the United Nations demographic handbook 1973-1976 shows that, excepting Israel and OPEC Arab states, Australia has the most diverse wotkforce of all modern industrialised countries by having a substantial proportion of overseas-born persons working in industry, construction and manufacturing.
(2) Does the Australian code of occupational health and safety fail to acknowledge this fact.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that the United Nations does not produce a publication entitled the demographic handbook 1973-1976. However, it is a fact that Australia has a substantial proportion of overseas-born persons working in industry, construction and manufacturing.
(2) I am informed that there is no Australian code of occupational health and safety. The honourable member may have in mind the Code of General Principles on Occupational Safety and Health in Commonwealth Government Employment which"is the responsibility of my colleague the Minister for Science and Technology from whom the honourable member may care to seek further information.
Car Hire
(Question No. 310)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administnitive Services, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

(I) What expenditure was incurred in relation to the use of hire cars in Canberra, ACT, for (a) the Parliamentary shuttle service and (b) all other purposes, for (i) 1979-80 and (ii) the period 1 July 1980 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.

(2) What are the rates for the hire of (a) Government and (b) private hire cars.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) The accounting arrangements used for cars sup-
plied provide for dissections of cost to be made on a billing rather than an expenditure basis and do not currently distinguish between work carried out by private hire cars and taxis. Accounts rendered for vehicles provided at the request
of the Parliamentary transport officers for the movement of Members and Senators to and from Parliament House and to
and from Canberra Airport during Parliamentary sessions are:

(i) 1979-80 Private hire cars and taxis Commonwealth cars
(ii) I July 1980 to 8 February 1981 *
Private hire cars and taxis Commonwealth cars
(* End of latest four-weekly billing period.)

$ 160,138 393,358
68,941 154,632

(b) The accounts for all other purposes include charges for
transport for Members and Senators in Canberra other than as above and all transport provided to Ministers, together
with services performed for departments and authorities. The amounts billed were:

(i). 1979-80 Private hire cars and taxis Commonwealth cars
(ii) I July 1980 to 8 February 1981 Private hire cars and taxis Commonwealth cars

$ 1,138,157 1,471,581
845,628 888,185

(2) (a) Government cars. Ordinary rate $15.60 per hour. Special rate-applies when a Commonwealth car is specifically requested-$19.20 per hour. There is no minimum period of hire or charge.

(b) Hire cars-the current contract rates for hire cars in Canberra range from $15 to $17.60 per hour with most con-
tractors having a 30 minute minimum charge. A ten per cent
addition to those charges is made by the Department of Administrative Services, to meet its own costs, when accounts are forwarded to the ordering organisation.

Disabled Children
(Question No. 327)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he accept the recommendation to provide a special student allowance to disabled children who wish to pursue secondary and tertiary education contained in the Report by the Women's Advisory Council entitled 'My Child was Born Disabled'?
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Special assistance is provided under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme for disabled children who must live away from home to receive appropriate schooling. The boarding allowances payable in 1981 under this scheme have a maximum value ranging from $1,740 pa for a primary student to $2,040 pa for a senior secondary student, including in each case a basic allowance of $780 pa free of means test.

224 REPRESENTATIVES 2S February 1981

Answers to Questions

The normal provisions of other student assistance schemes ar,e also, of course, available to disabled students seeking to complete secondary or tertiary education, These schemes include the Secondary Allowances Scheme (SAS), which provides benefits to needy families with children in years 11 and 12, the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme (ASEAS), which assists adult students returning to complete the final matriculation year, and the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS), which provides living and other 'allowances for students undertaking post-secondary courses'at universities, colleges of advanced education and TAPE colleges,

The Commonwealth, through the programs of the Schools Commission, provides funds amounting to $,L7,2m in 1981, to government and non-government schools' for special education, In 1981 the Commonwealth is prov,~diPg an additional $lm to the States to assist with the integrati~h,9fhandicapped children into regular schools, The Commonwealth Government has also announced that it will make $2m available in 1981 for the development of education programs for severely handicapped children, Both these programs are being administered by the Schools Commission,


